RESOLUTION 55/100
Adopted at the 81st plenary meeting, on 4 December 2000, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/55/602/Add.2 and Corr.1, para. 94),The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Bolivia, Cuba, El Salvador, Ghana and Honduras. by a recorded vote of 106 to 1, with 67 abstentions, as follows:
In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Bahamas, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Chad, Chile, China, Comoros, Congo, Côte d'Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Jamaica, Jordan, Kuwait, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Solomon Islands, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: United States of America
Abstentions: Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Belgium, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Canada, Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Djibouti, Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Maldives, Malta, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia, Nauru, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Palau, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Samoa, San Marino, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Uzbekistan
55/100. Respect for the right to universal freedom of travel and the vital importance of family reunification
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming that all human rights and fundamental freedoms are universal, indivisible, interdependent and interrelated,
Recalling the provisions of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,Resolution 217 A (III). as well as article 12 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
Stressing that, as stated in the Programme of Action of the International Conference on Population and Development,Report of the International Conference on Population and Development, Cairo, 5-13 September 1994 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.95.XIII.18), chap. I, resolution 1, annex. family reunification of documented migrants is an important factor in international migration and that remittances by documented migrants to their countries of origin often constitute a very important source of foreign exchange and are instrumental in improving the well-being of relatives left behind,
Recalling its resolution 54/169 of 17 December 1999,
1. Once again calls upon all States to guarantee the universally recognized freedom of travel to all foreign nationals legally residing in their territory;
2. Reaffirms that all Governments, in particular those of receiving countries, must recognize the vital importance of family reunification and promote its incorporation into national legislation in order to ensure protection of the unity of families of documented migrants;
3. Calls upon all States to allow, in conformity with international legislation, the free flow of financial remittances by foreign nationals residing in their territory to their relatives in the country of origin;
4. Also calls upon all States to refrain from enacting, and to repeal if it already exists, legislation intended as a coercive measure that discriminates against individuals or groups of legal migrants by adversely affecting family reunification and the right to send financial remittance to relatives in the country of origin;
5. Decides to continue its consideration of this question at its fifty-seventh session under the item entitled "Human rights questions".
RESOLUTION 55/101
Adopted at the 81st plenary meeting, on 4 December 2000, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/55/602/Add.2 and Corr.1, para. 94),The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Belarus, Burundi, Chad, China, Cuba, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Ethiopia, Guinea, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Myanmar, Namibia, Nigeria, Russian Federation, Sudan and United Republic of Tanzania. by a recorded vote of 104 to 52, with 15 abstentions, as follows:
In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Chad, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d'Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Qatar, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Solomon Islands, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Albania, Andorra, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Palau, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Samoa, San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America
Abstentions: Argentina, Brazil, Cape Verde, Chile, Guatemala, Nauru, Nicaragua, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Sao Tome and Principe, Singapore, South Africa, Thailand, Uruguay
55/101. Respect for the purposes and principles contained in the Charter of the United Nations to achieve international cooperation in promoting and encouraging respect for human rights and for fundamental freedoms and in solving international problems of a humanitarian character
The General Assembly,
Recalling that, in accordance with Article 56 of the Charter of the United Nations, all Member States have pledged themselves to take joint and separate action in cooperation with the Organization for the achievement of the purposes set forth in Article 55, including universal respect for and observance of, human rights and fundamental freedoms for all without distinction as to race, sex, language or religion,
Recalling also the Preamble to the Charter, in particular the determination to reaffirm faith in fundamental human rights, in the dignity and worth of the human person and in the equal rights of men and women and of nations large and small,
Reaffirming that the promotion and protection of all human rights and fundamental freedoms must be considered a priority objective of the United Nations in accordance with its purposes and principles, in particular the purpose of international cooperation, and that, within the framework of these purposes and principles, the promotion and protection of all human rights are a legitimate concern of the international community,
Considering the major changes taking place on the international scene and the aspirations of all peoples to an international order based on the principles enshrined in the Charter, including promoting and encouraging respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms for all and respect for the principle of equal rights and self-determination of peoples, peace, democracy, justice, equality, rule of law, pluralism, development, better standards of living and solidarity,
Recognizing that the international community should devise ways and means to remove current obstacles and meet the challenges to the full realization of all human rights and to prevent the continuation of human rights violations resulting therefrom throughout the world, as well as continue to pay attention to the importance of mutual cooperation, understanding and dialogue in ensuring the promotion and protection of all human rights,
Reaffirming that the enhancement of international cooperation in the field of human rights is essential for the full achievement of the purposes of the United Nations and that human rights and fundamental freedoms are the birthright of all human beings, the protection and promotion of such rights and freedoms being the first responsibility of Governments,
Reaffirming also that all human rights are universal, indivisible, interdependent and interrelated and that the international community must treat human rights globally in a fair and equal manner, on the same footing and with the same emphasis,
Reaffirming further the various articles of the Charter setting out the respective powers and functions of the General Assembly, the Security Council and the Economic and Social Council, as the paramount framework for the achievement of the purposes of the United Nations,
Reaffirming the commitment of all States to fulfil their obligations under other important instruments of international law, in particular those of international human rights and humanitarian law,
Taking into account that, in accordance with Article 103 of the Charter, in the event of a conflict between the obligations of the Members of the United Nations under the Charter and their obligations under any other international agreement, their obligations under the Charter shall prevail,
1. Affirms the solemn commitment of all States to enhance international cooperation in the field of human rights and in the solution to international problems of a humanitarian character in full compliance with the Charter of the United Nations, inter alia, by the strict observance of all the purposes and principles set forth in Articles 1 and 2 thereof;
2. Stresses the vital role of the work of United Nations and regional arrangements, acting consistently with the purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter, in promoting and encouraging respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms, as well as in solving international problems of a humanitarian character, and affirms that all States in these activities must fully comply with the principles set forth in Article 2 of the Charter, in particular respecting the sovereign equality of all States and refraining from the threat or use of force against the territorial integrity or political independence of any State, or acting in any other manner inconsistent with the purposes of the United Nations;
3. Reaffirms that the United Nations shall promote universal respect for and observance of, human rights and fundamental freedoms for all without distinction as to race, sex, language or religion;
4. Calls upon all States to cooperate fully, through constructive dialogue, in order to ensure the promotion and protection of all human rights for all and in promoting peaceful solutions to international problems of a humanitarian character and, in their actions towards that purpose, to comply strictly with the principles and norms of international law, inter alia, by fully respecting international human rights and humanitarian law;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to bring the present resolution to the attention of Member States, organs, bodies and other components of the United Nations system, and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations and to disseminate it on the widest possible basis;
6. Decides to consider this question at its fifty-sixth session under the item entitled "Human rights questions".
RESOLUTION 55/102
Adopted at the 81st plenary meeting, on 4 December 2000, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/55/602/Add.2 and Corr.1, para. 94),The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Barbados, Benin, Bhutan, Botswana, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cameroon, China, Côte d'Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Egypt, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Gambia, Ghana, Guinea, Guyana, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Kenya, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania, Morocco, Myanmar, Namibia, Niger, Nigeria, Pakistan, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Sierra Leone, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Togo, Uganda, United Republic of Tanzania, Viet Nam, Zambia and Zimbabwe. by a recorded vote of 112 to 46, with 15 abstentions, as follows:
In favour: Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Chad, China, Comoros, Congo, Côte d'Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, United Republic of Tanzania, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands, Monaco, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Palau, Poland, Portugal, Romania, San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America
Abstentions: Argentina, Armenia, Colombia, Costa Rica, Guatemala, Micronesia (Federated States of), Paraguay, Peru, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Singapore, Thailand, United Arab Emirates, Uruguay, Uzbekistan
55/102. Globalization and its impact on the full enjoyment of all human rights
The General Assembly,
Guided by the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations, and expressing in particular the need to achieve international cooperation in promoting and encouraging respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms for all without distinction,
Recalling the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,Resolution 217 A (III). as well as the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action adopted by the World Conference on Human Rights on 25 June 1993,A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.
Recalling also the International Covenant on Civil and Political RightsSee resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex. and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights,See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
Recalling further the Declaration on the Right to Development adopted by the General Assembly in its resolution 41/128 of 4 December 1986,
Recalling the United Nations Millennium DeclarationSee resolution 55/2. and the outcome documents of the twenty-thirdResolutions S-23/2, annex, and S-23/3, annex. and twenty-fourthResolution S-24/2, annex. special sessions of the General Assembly, held, respectively, in New York from 5 to 10 June 2000 and Geneva from 26 June to 1 July 2000,
Recognizing that all human rights are universal, indivisible, interdependent and interrelated and that the international community must treat human rights globally in a fair and equal manner, on the same footing and with the same emphasis,
Realizing that globalization affects all countries differently and makes them more exposed to external developments, positive as well as negative, including in the field of human rights,
Realizing also that globalization is not merely an economic process but also has social, political, environmental, cultural and legal dimensions which have an impact on the full enjoyment of all human rights,
Recognizing that multilateral mechanisms have a unique role to play in meeting the challenges and opportunities presented by globalization,
Expressing concern at the negative impact of international financial turbulence on social and economic development and on the full enjoyment of all human rights,
Deeply concerned that the widening gap between the developed and the developing countries, and within countries, has contributed, inter alia, to deepening poverty and has adversely affected the full enjoyment of all human rights, in particular in developing countries,
Noting that human beings strive for a world that is respectful of human rights and cultural diversity and that, in this regard, they work to ensure that all activities, including those affected by globalization, are consistent with those aims,
1. Recognizes that, while globalization, by its impact on, inter alia, the role of the State, may affect human rights, the promotion and protection of all human rights is first and foremost the responsibility of the State;
2. Reaffirms that narrowing the gap between rich and poor, both within and between countries, is an explicit goal at the national and international levels, as part of the effort to create an enabling environment for the full enjoyment of all human rights;
3. Also reaffirms the commitment to create an environment at both the national and global levels that is conducive to development and to the elimination of poverty through, inter alia, good governance within each country and at the international level, transparency in the financial, monetary and trading systems and commitment to an open, equitable, rule-based, predictable and non-discriminatory multilateral trading and financial system;
4. Recognizes that, while globalization offers great opportunities, its benefits are very unevenly shared and its costs are unevenly distributed, an aspect of the process that affects the full enjoyment of all human rights, in particular in developing countries;
5. Also recognizes that, only through broad and sustained efforts, including policies and measures at the global level to create a shared future based upon our common humanity in all its diversity, can globalization be made fully inclusive and equitable and have a human face, thus contributing to the full enjoyment of all human rights;
6. Affirms that globalization is a complex process of structural transformation, with numerous interdisciplinary aspects, which has an impact on the enjoyment of civil, political, economic, social and cultural rights, including the right to development;
7. Also affirms that the international community should strive to respond to the challenges and opportunities posed by globalization in a manner that ensures respect for the cultural diversity of all;
8. Underlines, therefore, the need to continue to analyse the consequences of globalization for the full enjoyment of all human rights;
9. Takes note of the preliminary report of the Secretary-General on globalization and its impact on the full enjoyment of all human rights,A/55/342. and requests the Secretary-General, taking into account the different views of Member States, to submit a comprehensive report on this subject to the General Assembly at its fifty-sixth session.
RESOLUTION 55/103
Adopted at the 81st plenary meeting, on 4 December 2000, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/55/602/Add.2 and Corr.1, para. 94)The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Andorra, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Cuba, Cyprus, Denmark, Fiji, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Malta, Monaco, Morocco, Netherlands, New Zealand, Niger, Norway, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
55/103. Question of enforced or involuntary disappearances
The General Assembly,
Guided by the purposes and principles set forth in the Charter of the United Nations, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,Resolution 217 A (III). the International Covenants on Human RightsResolution 2200 A (XXI), annex. and the other relevant international human rights instruments,
Recalling its resolution 33/173 of 20 December 1978 concerning disappeared persons and its previous resolutions on the question of enforced or involuntary disappearances, in particular resolution 53/150 of 9 December 1998,
Recalling also its resolution 47/133 of 18 December 1992 proclaiming the Declaration on the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance as a body of principles for all States,
Expressing concern that, according to the Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances of the Commission on Human Rights, the practice of a number of States can run counter to the Declaration,
Deeply concerned, in particular, by the intensification of enforced disappearances in various regions of the world and by the growing number of reports concerning the harassment, ill-treatment and intimidation of witnesses of disappearances or relatives of persons who have disappeared,
Emphasizing that impunity with regard to enforced disappearances contributes to the perpetuation of this phenomenon and constitutes one of the obstacles to the elucidation of its manifestations,
Taking note with interest of the initiatives taken at the national and international levels in order to end impunity,
Bearing in mind Commission on Human Rights resolution 2000/37 of 20 April 2000,See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2000, Supplement No. 3 and corrigendum (E/2000/23 and Corr.1), chap. II, sect. A.
Taking note of the transmission by the Subcommission on the Promotion and Protection of Human RightsFormerly known as the Subcommission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities (see Economic and Social Council decision 1999/256). to the Commission on Human Rights of a draft international convention on the protection of all persons from forced disappearance,E/CN.4/Sub.2/1998/19, annex.
Convinced that further efforts are needed to promote wider awareness of and respect for the Declaration, and taking note in this regard of the report of the Secretary-General on the question of enforced or involuntary disappearances,A/55/289.
1. Reaffirms that any act of enforced disappearance is an offence to human dignity and a grave and flagrant violation of the human rights and fundamental freedoms proclaimed in the Universal Declaration of Human RightsResolution 217 A (III). and reaffirmed and developed in other international instruments in this field, as well as a violation of the rules of international law;
2. Urges all Governments to take appropriate legislative or other steps to prevent and suppress the practice of enforced disappearances, in keeping with the Declaration on the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance, and to take action to that end at the national and regional levels and in cooperation with the United Nations, including through the provision of technical assistance;
3. Calls upon Governments to take steps to ensure that, when a state of emergency is introduced, the protection of human rights is ensured, in particular as regards the prevention of enforced disappearances;
4. Reminds Governments that impunity with regard to enforced disappearances contributes to the perpetuation of this phenomenon and constitutes one of the obstacles to the elucidation of its manifestations, and in this respect also reminds them of the need to ensure that their competent authorities conduct prompt and impartial inquiries in all circumstances in which there is a reason to believe that an enforced disappearance has occurred in territory under their jurisdiction, and that, if allegations are confirmed, perpetrators should be prosecuted;
5. Once again urges the Governments concerned to take steps to protect the families of disappeared persons against any intimidation or ill-treatment to which they may be subjected;
6. Encourages States, as some have already done, to provide concrete information on measures taken to give effect to the Declaration, as well as obstacles encountered;
7. Requests all States to consider the possibility of disseminating the text of the Declaration in their respective national languages and to facilitate its dissemination in local languages;
8. Notes the action taken by non-governmental organizations to encourage implementation of the Declaration, and invites them to continue to facilitate its dissemination and to contribute to the work of the Subcommission on the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights;
9. Requests the Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances of the Commission on Human Rights, in the continued exercise of its mandate, to take into account the provisions of the Declaration and to modify its working methods, if necessary;
10. Recalls the importance of the Working Group, the primary role of which is, as described in its reports, to act as a channel of communication between the families of disappeared persons and the Governments concerned, with a view to ensuring that sufficiently documented and clearly identified individual cases are investigated, and to ascertain whether such information falls under its mandate and contains the required elements, and invites the Group to continue to seek the views and comments of all concerned, including Member States, in preparing its reports;
11. Invites the Working Group to identify obstacles to the realization of the provisions of the Declaration, to recommend ways of overcoming those obstacles and, in this regard, to continue a dialogue with Governments and relevant intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations;
12. Encourages the Working Group to continue to consider the question of impunity, in the light of the relevant provisions of the Declaration and of the final reports submitted by the special rapporteursE/CN.4/Sub.2/1997/8 and E/CN.4/Sub.2/1997/20/Rev.1. appointed by the Subcommission;
13. Requests the Working Group to pay the utmost attention to cases of children subjected to enforced disappearance and children of disappeared persons and to cooperate closely with the Governments concerned to search for and identify those children;
14. Appeals to the Governments concerned, in particular those which have not yet replied to the communications transmitted by the Working Group, to cooperate fully with it and, in particular, to reply promptly to its requests for information so that, while respecting its working methods based on discretion, it may perform its strictly humanitarian role;
15. Encourages the Governments concerned to give serious consideration to inviting the Working Group to visit their countries so as to enable the Group to fulfil its mandate even more effectively;
16. Expresses its profound thanks to the many Governments that have cooperated with the Working Group and replied to its requests for information and to the Governments that have invited the Group to visit their countries, requests them to give all necessary attention to the recommendations of the Group, and invites them to inform the Group of any action they take on those recommendations;
17. Calls upon the Commission on Human Rights to continue to study this question as a matter of priority and to take any steps it may deem necessary to the pursuit of the task of the Working Group and to the follow-up to its recommendations when it considers the report to be submitted by the Group to the Commission at its fifty-seventh session;
18. Renews its requests to the Secretary-General to continue to provide the Working Group with all of the facilities it requires to perform its functions, especially for carrying out missions and following them up;
19. Requests the Secretary-General to keep it informed of the steps he takes to secure the widespread dissemination and promotion of the Declaration;
20. Also requests the Secretary-General to submit to it at its fifty-seventh session a report on the steps taken to implement the present resolution;
21. Decides to consider the question of enforced disappearances, and in particular the implementation of the Declaration, at its fifty-seventh session under the sub-item entitled "Human rights questions, including alternative approaches for improving the effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms".
RESOLUTION 55/104
Adopted at the 81st plenary meeting, on 4 December 2000, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/55/602/Add.2 and Corr.1, para. 94)The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Algeria, Angola, Bangladesh, Benin, Botswana, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, China, Colombia, Congo, Cuba, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Egypt, El Salvador, Ethiopia, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Lao People's Democratic Republic, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania, Mexico, Myanmar, Namibia, Nigeria, Peru, Rwanda, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian Arab Republic, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia and Zimbabwe.
55/104. Strengthening United Nations action in the field of human rights through the promotion of international cooperation and the importance of non-selectivity, impartiality and objectivity
The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind that among the purposes of the United Nations are those of developing friendly relations among nations based on respect for the principle of equal rights and self-determination of peoples and taking other appropriate measures to strengthen universal peace, as well as achieving international cooperation in solving international problems of an economic, social, cultural or humanitarian character and in promoting and encouraging respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms for all without distinction as to race, sex, language or religion,
Desirous of achieving further progress in international cooperation in promoting and encouraging respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms,
Considering that such international cooperation should be based on the principles embodied in international law, especially the Charter of the United Nations, as well as the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,Resolution 217 A (III). the International Covenants on Human RightsResolution 2200 A (XXI), annex. and other relevant instruments,
Deeply convinced that United Nations action in this field should be based not only on a profound understanding of the broad range of problems existing in all societies but also on full respect for the political, economic and social realities of each of them, in strict compliance with the purposes and principles of the Charter and for the basic purpose of promoting and encouraging respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms through international cooperation,
Recalling its previous resolutions in this regard,
Reaffirming the importance of ensuring the universality, objectivity and non-selectivity of the consideration of human rights issues, as affirmed in the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action, adopted by the World Conference on Human Rights on 25 June 1993,A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.
Affirming the importance of the objectivity, independence and discretion of the special rapporteurs and representatives on thematic issues and on countries, as well as of the members of the working groups, in carrying out their mandates,
Underlining the obligation that Governments have to promote and protect human rights and to carry out the responsibilities that they have undertaken under international law, especially the Charter, as well as various international instruments in the field of human rights,
1. Reiterates that, by virtue of the principle of equal rights and self-determination of peoples enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations, all peoples have the right freely to determine, without external interference, their political status and to pursue their economic, social and cultural development, and that every State has the duty to respect that right within the provisions of the Charter, including respect for territorial integrity;
2. Reaffirms that it is a purpose of the United Nations and the task of all Member States, in cooperation with the Organization, to promote and encourage respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms and to remain vigilant with regard to violations of human rights wherever they occur;
3. Calls upon all Member States to base their activities for the promotion and protection of human rights, including the development of further international cooperation in this field, on the Charter of the United Nations, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,Resolution 217 A (III). the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights,Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex. the International Covenant on Civil and Political RightsResolution 2200 A (XXI), annex. and other relevant international instruments, and to refrain from activities that are inconsistent with that international framework;
4. Considers that international cooperation in this field should make an effective and practical contribution to the urgent task of preventing mass and flagrant violations of human rights and fundamental freedoms for all and to the strengthening of international peace and security;
5. Reaffirms that the promotion, protection and full realization of all human rights and fundamental freedoms, as a legitimate concern of the world community, should be guided by the principles of non-selectivity, impartiality and objectivity and should not be used for political ends;
6. Requests all human rights bodies within the United Nations system, as well as the special rapporteurs and representatives, independent experts and working groups, to take duly into account the contents of the present resolution in carrying out their mandates;
7. Expresses its conviction that an unbiased and fair approach to human rights issues contributes to the promotion of international cooperation as well as to the effective promotion, protection and realization of human rights and fundamental freedoms;
8. Stresses, in this context, the continuing need for impartial and objective information on the political, economic and social situations and events of all countries;
9. Invites Member States to consider adopting, as appropriate, within the framework of their respective legal systems and in accordance with their obligations under international law, especially the Charter, and international human rights instruments, the measures that they may deem appropriate to achieve further progress in international cooperation in promoting and encouraging respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms;
10. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to take duly into account the present resolution and to consider further proposals for the strengthening of United Nations action in the field of human rights through the promotion of international cooperation and the importance of non-selectivity, impartiality and objectivity;
11. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General,A/55/213 and Add.1 and 2. and requests the Secretary-General to invite Member States to present practical proposals and ideas that would contribute to the strengthening of United Nations action in the field of human rights, through the promotion of international cooperation based on the principles of non-selectivity, impartiality and objectivity, and to submit a comprehensive report on this question to the General Assembly at its fifty-sixth session;
12. Decides to consider this matter at its fifty-sixth session under the item entitled "Human rights questions".
RESOLUTION 55/105
Adopted at the 81st plenary meeting, on 4 December 2000, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/55/602/Add.2 and Corr.1, para. 94)The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Albania, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Benin, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Cameroon, Canada, Chile, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Ecuador, El Salvador, Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Honduras, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Kenya, Lesotho, Liberia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malta, Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, New Zealand, Norway, Panama, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America and Venezuela.
55/105. Regional arrangements for the promotion and protection of human rights
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 32/127 of 16 December 1977 and all its subsequent resolutions concerning regional arrangements for the promotion and protection of human rights,
Recalling also Commission on Human Rights resolution 1993/51 of 9 March 1993See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1993, Supplement No. 3 and corrigenda (E/1993/23 and Corr.2, 4 and 5), chap. II, sect. A. and its subsequent resolutions in this regard,
Bearing in mind the relevant resolutions of the Commission concerning advisory services and technical cooperation in the field of human rights, including its most recent on that subject, resolution 2000/80 of 26 April 2000,Ibid., 2000, Supplement No. 3 and corrigendum (E/2000/23 and Corr.1), chap. II, sect. A.
Bearing in mind also the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action, adopted by the World Conference on Human Rights on 25 June 1993,A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III. which reiterates, inter alia, the need to consider the possibility of establishing regional and subregional arrangements for the promotion and protection of human rights where they do not already exist,
Recalling that the World Conference recommended that more resources should be made available for the strengthening of regional arrangements for the promotion and protection of human rights under the programme of technical cooperation in the field of human rights of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
Reaffirming that regional arrangements play a fundamental role in promoting and protecting human rights and should reinforce universal human rights standards, as contained in international human rights instruments, and their protection,
Noting the progress achieved so far in the promotion and protection of human rights at the regional level under the auspices of the United Nations, the specialized agencies and the regional intergovernmental organizations,
Considering that cooperation between the United Nations and regional arrangements in the field of human rights continues to be both substantive and supportive and that possibilities exist for increased cooperation,
1. Takes note with satisfaction of the report of the Secretary-General;A/55/279.
2. Welcomes the continuing cooperation and assistance of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights in the further strengthening of the existing regional arrangements and regional machinery for the promotion and protection of human rights, in particular through technical cooperation which is aimed at national capacity-building, public information and education, with a view to exchanging information and experience in the field of human rights;
3. Also welcomes, in that respect, the close cooperation of the Office of the High Commissioner in the organization of regional and subregional training courses and workshops in the field of human rights, high-level governmental expert meetings and regional conferences of national human rights institutions, aimed at creating greater understanding in the regions of issues concerning the promotion and protection of human rights, improving procedures and examining the various systems for the promotion and protection of universally accepted human rights standards, and identifying obstacles to ratification of the principal international human rights treaties and strategies to overcome them;
4. Recognizes, therefore, that progress in promoting and protecting all human rights depends primarily on efforts made at the national and local levels and that the regional approach should imply intensive cooperation and coordination with all partners involved;
5. Stresses the importance of the programme of technical cooperation in the field of human rights, renews its appeal to all Governments to consider making use of the possibilities offered by the United Nations under this programme of organizing information or training courses at the national level for government personnel on the application of international human rights standards and the experience of relevant international bodies, and notes with satisfaction, in that respect, the establishment of technical cooperation projects with Governments of all regions;
6. Welcomes the growing exchanges between the United Nations and the bodies created by the United Nations in accordance with the treaties dealing with human rights, on the one hand, and regional intergovernmental organizations, such as the Council of Europe, the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights and the African Commission on Human and Peoples' Rights, on the other;
7. Also welcomes the appointment by the High Commissioner of four human rights personalities to serve as regional advisors, who will play a significant role in the promotion of human rights and human rights advocacy through the design of strategies and the development of partnerships for human rights, facilitate coordination of human rights technical cooperation in the region and assist regional cooperation at large, for example, among national institutions, parliamentary human rights bodies, bar associations and non-governmental organizations;
8. Recalls in this regard the positive experience of the presence of the Office of the High Commissioner in southern Africa, which will serve as guidance in the development of the regional approach of the Office of the High Commissioner;
9. Notes with interest the programme for Africa of the Office of the High Commissioner and the objective of strengthening cooperation between the Office of the High Commissioner and the Organization of African Unity with a view to reviewing, on a regular basis, needs in the area of human rights in the various subregions;
10. Also notes with interest the further developments in the implementation of the Framework for Regional Technical Cooperation for the Asia-Pacific Region, which is enhancing technical cooperation in the promotion and protection of human rights in the region;Ibid., sect. III.B.
11. Takes note with interest of the Quito Framework for Technical Cooperation in the Field of Human Rights, which serves as a basis for the regional strategy of the Office of the High Commissioner and aims at strengthening national capacities for the promotion of human rights in Latin America and the Caribbean;
12. Welcomes the continued cooperation between the Office of the High Commissioner and regional organizations in Europe and Central Asia, in particular in the development, as a priority, of a regional approach to preventing trafficking in persons;
13. Invites States in areas in which regional arrangements in the field of human rights do not yet exist to consider concluding agreements with a view to establishing, within their respective regions, suitable regional machinery for the promotion and protection of human rights;
14. Requests the Secretary-General, as foreseen in programme 19 (Human rights) of the medium-term plan for the period 1998-2001,See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-third Session, Supplement No. 6 (A/53/6/Rev.1). to continue to strengthen exchanges between the United Nations and regional intergovernmental organizations dealing with human rights and to make available adequate resources from within the regular budget of technical cooperation to the activities of the Office of the High Commissioner to promote regional arrangements;
15. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to continue to pay special attention to the most appropriate ways of assisting, at their request, countries of the various regions under the programme of technical cooperation and to make, where necessary, relevant recommendations;
16. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its fifty-seventh session a report on the state of regional arrangements for the promotion and protection of human rights and to include therein the results of action taken in pursuance of the present resolution;
17. Decides to consider this question further at its fifty-seventh session.
RESOLUTION 55/106
Adopted at the 81st plenary meeting, on 4 December 2000, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/55/602/Add.2 and Corr.1, para. 94)The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Albania, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Austria, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Benin, Bolivia, Brazil, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cameroon, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d'Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Finland, France, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Jordan, Kenya, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Mali, Malta, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, San Marino, Senegal, Sierra Leone, South Africa, Spain, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Venezuela and Viet Nam.
55/106. Human rights and extreme poverty
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,Resolution 217 A (III). the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex. the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights,See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex. and other human rights instruments adopted by the United Nations,
Considering the relevant provisions of the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action, adopted by the World Conference on Human Rights on 25 June 1993,A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III. and of the Copenhagen Declaration on Social Development and Programme of Action of the World Summit for Social Development, adopted by the World Summit on 12 March 1995,Report of the World Summit for Social Development, Copenhagen, 6-12 March 1995 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.8), chap. I, resolution 1, annexes I and II. and the outcome document of the twenty-fourth special session of the General Assembly entitled "World Summit for Social Development and beyond: achieving social development for all in a globalizing world", adopted at Geneva on 1 July 2000,Resolution S-24/2, annex.
Recalling its resolutions 47/196 of 22 December 1992, by which it declared 17 October the International Day for the Eradication of Poverty, 48/183 of 21 December 1993, by which it proclaimed 1996 the International Year for the Eradication of Poverty, 50/107 of 20 December 1995, by which it proclaimed the first United Nations Decade for the Eradication of Poverty (1997-2006), 51/97 of 12 December 1996 on human rights and extreme poverty, 52/193 of 18 December 1997, in which it emphasized the follow-up to the Decade, and 53/146 of 9 December 1998 on human rights and extreme poverty,
Recalling also its resolution 52/134 of 12 December 1997, in which it recognized that the enhancement of international cooperation in the field of human rights was essential for the understanding, promotion and protection of all human rights,
Recalling further its resolution 54/232 of 22 December 1999, in which it expressed its deep concern that the number of people living in extreme poverty continues to increase, with women and children constituting the majority and the most affected group,
Bearing in mind Commission on Human Rights resolutions 1992/11 of 21 February 1992,See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1992, Supplement No. 2 (E/1992/22), chap. II, sect. A. 1993/13 of 26 February 1993,Ibid., 1993, Supplement No. 3 and corrigenda (E/1993/23 and Corr.2, 4 and 5), chap. II, sect. A. 1994/12 of 25 February 1994,Ibid., 1994, Supplement No. 4 and corrigendum (E/1994/24 and Corr.1), chap. II, sect. A. 1995/16 of 24 February 1995,Ibid., 1995, Supplement No. 3 and corrigenda (E/1995/23 and Corr.1 and 2), chap. II, sect. A. 1996/10 of 11 April 1996,Ibid., 1996, Supplement No. 3 (E/1996/23), chap. II, sect. A. 1997/11 of 3 April 1997,Ibid., 1997, Supplement No. 3 (E/1997/23), chap. II, sect. A. 1998/25 of 17 April 1998,Ibid., 1998, Supplement No. 3 (E/1998/23), chap. II, sect. A. 1999/26 of 26 April 1999,Ibid., 1999, Supplement No. 3 (E/1999/23), chap. II, sect. A. and 2000/12 of 17 April 2000,Ibid., 2000, Supplement No. 3 and corrigendum (E/2000/23 and Corr.1), chap. II, sect. A. as well as resolution 1996/23 of 29 August 1996See E/CN.4/1997/2-E/CN.4/Sub.2/1996/41, chap. II, sect. A. of the Subcommission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities,Subsequently renamed the Subcommission on the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights (see Economic and Social Council decision 1999/256).
Recalling its resolution 47/134 of 18 December 1992, in which it reaffirmed that extreme poverty and exclusion from society constituted a violation of human dignity and stressed the need for a complete and in-depth study of extreme poverty, based on the experience and the thoughts of the poorest people,
Recognizing that the eradication of extreme poverty is a major challenge within the process of globalization and requires coordinated and continued policies through decisive national action and international cooperation,
Reaffirming that, as the existence of widespread extreme poverty inhibits the full and effective enjoyment of human rights and might, in some situations, constitute a threat to the right to life, its immediate alleviation and eventual eradication must remain a high priority for the international community,
Recalling the United Nations Millennium Declaration,See resolution 55/2.
Taking note with satisfaction of the interimE/CN.4/1999/48. and progressE/CN.4/2000/52. reports submitted to the Commission on Human Rights by the independent expert on the question of human rights and extreme poverty and the recommendations contained therein,
1. Reaffirms that extreme poverty and exclusion from society constitute a violation of human dignity and that urgent national and international action is therefore required to eliminate them;
2. Also reaffirms that it is essential for States to foster participation by the poorest people in the decision-making process in the societies in which they live, in the promotion of human rights and in efforts to combat extreme poverty, and for people living in poverty and vulnerable groups to be empowered to organize themselves and to participate in all aspects of political, economic and social life, in particular the planning and implementation of policies that affect them, thus enabling them to become genuine partners in development;
3. Emphasizes that extreme poverty is a major issue to be addressed by Governments, civil society and the United Nations system, including international financial institutions, and in this context reaffirms that political commitment is a prerequisite for the eradication of poverty;
4. Recognizes that surmounting extreme poverty constitutes an essential means to the full enjoyment of political, civil, economic, social and cultural rights, and reaffirms the interrelationship among these goals;
5. Reaffirms that the existence of widespread absolute poverty inhibits the full and effective enjoyment of human rights and renders democracy and popular participation fragile;
6. Also reaffirms the commitments on development and poverty eradication contained in the United Nations Millennium Declaration;See resolution 55/2.
7. Invites the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, within the framework of the implementation of the United Nations Decade for the Eradication of Poverty, to continue to give appropriate attention to the question of human rights and extreme poverty;
8. Notes with appreciation the specific actions taken by the United Nations Children's Fund and the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization to mitigate the effects of extreme poverty on children and the efforts of the United Nations Development Programme to give priority to the search for some means of alleviating poverty within the framework of the relevant resolutions, and urges them to continue this work;
9. Calls upon States, United Nations bodies, in particular the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and the United Nations Development Programme, intergovernmental organizations and non-governmental organizations to continue to give appropriate attention to the links between human rights and extreme poverty;
10. Decides to consider this question further at its fifty-seventh session under the sub-item entitled "Human rights questions, including alternative approaches for improving the effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms".
RESOLUTION 55/107
Adopted at the 81st plenary meeting, on 4 December 2000, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/55/602/Add.2 and Corr.1, para. 94),The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Algeria, Angola, Benin, Botswana, Burundi, China, Congo, Cuba, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Egypt, El Salvador, Ethiopia, Guinea, Iraq, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Mauritania, Mexico, Namibia, Nigeria, Pakistan, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic, United Republic of Tanzania and Viet Nam. by a recorded vote of 109 to 52, with 7 abstentions, as follows:
In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Chad, China, Colombia, Congo, Côte d'Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Sao Tome and Principe, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Uganda, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Palau, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Samoa, San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America
Abstentions: Argentina, Costa Rica, Guatemala, Morocco, Paraguay, Peru, Senegal
55/107. Promotion of a democratic and equitable international order
The General Assembly,
Noting the adoption by the Commission on Human Rights of its resolution 2000/62 of 26 April 2000,See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2000, Supplement No. 3 and corrigendum (E/2000/23 and Corr.1), chap. II, sect. A.
Reaffirming the commitment of all States to fulfil their obligations to promote universal respect for, and observance and protection of, all human rights and fundamental freedoms for all, in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, other instruments relating to human rights and international law,
Affirming that the enhancement of international cooperation for the promotion and protection of all human rights should continue to be carried out in full conformity with the purposes and principles of the Charter and international law as set forth in Articles 1 and 2 of the Charter and, inter alia, with full respect for sovereignty, territorial integrity, political independence, the non-use of force or the threat of force in international relations and non-intervention in matters that are essentially within the domestic jurisdiction of any State,
Recalling the Preamble to the Charter, in particular the determination to reaffirm faith in fundamental human rights, in the dignity and worth of the human person, and in the equal rights of men and women and of nations large and small,
Reaffirming that everyone is entitled to a social and international order in which the rights and freedoms set forth in the Universal Declaration of Human RightsResolution 217 A (III). can be fully realized,
Reaffirming also the determination expressed in the Preamble to the Charter to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war, to establish conditions under which justice and respect for the obligations arising from treaties and other sources of international law can be maintained, to promote social progress and better standards of life in larger freedom, to practise tolerance and good-neighbourliness, and to employ international machinery for the promotion of the economic and social advancement of all peoples,
Considering the major changes taking place on the international scene and the aspirations of all peoples for an international order based on the principles enshrined in the Charter, including promoting and encouraging respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms for all and respect for the principle of equal rights and self-determination of peoples, peace, democracy, justice, equality, the rule of law, pluralism, development, better standards of living and solidarity,
Considering also that the Universal Declaration of Human Rights proclaims that all human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights and that everyone is entitled to all the rights and freedoms set out therein, without distinction of any kind, such as race, colour, sex, language, religion, political or other opinion, national or social origin, property, birth or other status,
Reaffirming that democracy, development and respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms are interdependent and mutually reinforcing, and that democracy is based on the freely expressed will of the people to determine their own political, economic, social and cultural systems and their full participation in all aspects of their lives,
Emphasizing that democracy is not only a political concept but also has economic and social dimensions,
Recognizing that democracy, respect for all human rights, including the right to development, transparent and accountable governance and administration in all sectors of society, and effective participation by civil society are an essential part of the necessary foundations for the realization of social and people-centred sustainable development,
Underlining the fact that it is imperative for the international community to ensure that globalization becomes a positive force for all the world's people, and that only through broad and sustained efforts, based on common humanity in all its diversity, can globalization be made fully inclusive and equitable,
Stressing that efforts to make globalization fully inclusive and equitable must include policies and measures, at the global level, that correspond to the needs of developing countries and economies in transition and are formulated and implemented with their effective participation,
Resolved, on the eve of a new century and millennium, to take all measures within its power to secure a democratic and equitable international order,
1. Affirms that everyone is entitled to a democratic and equitable international order;
2. Also affirms that a democratic and equitable international order fosters the full respect for and realization of all human rights for all;
3. Further affirms that a democratic and equitable international order requires, inter alia, the realization of the following:
(a) The right of all peoples to self-determination, by virtue of which they can freely determine their political status and freely pursue their economic, social and cultural development;
(b) The right of peoples and nations to permanent sovereignty over their natural wealth and resources;
(c) The right of every human person and all peoples to development;
(d) The right of all peoples to peace;
(e) The promotion of an international economic order based on equal participation in the decision-making process, interdependence, mutual interest, solidarity and cooperation among all States;
(f) Solidarity, as a fundamental value, by virtue of which global challenges must be managed in a way that distributes costs and burdens fairly in accordance with basic principles of equity and social justice and ensures that those who suffer or who benefit the least receive help from those who benefit the most;
(g) The promotion and consolidation of transparent, democratic, just and accountable international institutions in all areas of cooperation, in particular through the implementation of the principles of full and equal participation in their respective decision-making mechanisms;
(h) The principle of equitable regional and gender-balanced representation in the composition of the staff of all bodies within the United Nations system;
(i) The promotion of a free, just, effective and balanced international information and communication order, based on international cooperation for the establishment of a new equilibrium and greater reciprocity in the international flow of information, in particular, correcting the inequalities in the flow of information to and from developing countries;
(j) The respect for cultural diversity and the cultural rights of all, since this enhances cultural pluralism, contributes to a wider exchange of knowledge and understanding of cultural backgrounds, advances the application and enjoyment of universally accepted human rights across the world and fosters stable, friendly relations among peoples and nations worldwide;
(k) The entitlement of every person and all peoples to a healthy environment;
(l) The promotion of equitable access to benefits from the international distribution of wealth through enhanced international cooperation, in particular in economic, commercial and financial international relations;
(m) The enjoyment by everyone of the common heritage of mankind;
4. Stresses the importance of preserving the rich and diverse nature of the international community of nations and peoples, as well as respect for national and regional particularities and various historical, cultural and religious backgrounds in the enhancement of international cooperation in the field of human rights;
5. Also stresses that all human rights are universal, indivisible, interdependent and interrelated and that the international community must treat human rights globally in a fair and equal manner, on the same footing and with the same emphasis, and reaffirms that, while the significance of national and regional particularities and various historical, cultural and religious backgrounds must be borne in mind, it is the duty of States, regardless of their political, economic and cultural systems, to promote and protect all human rights and fundamental freedoms;
6. Reaffirms that all States should promote the establishment, maintenance and strengthening of international peace and security and, to that end, should do their utmost to achieve general and complete disarmament under effective international control, as well as to ensure that the resources released by effective disarmament measures are used for comprehensive development, in particular that of the developing countries;
7. Recalls the proclamation by the General Assembly of the determination to work urgently for the establishment of a new international economic order based on equity, sovereign equality, interdependence, common interest and cooperation among all States, irrespective of their economic and social systems, which shall correct inequalities and redress existing injustices, make it possible to eliminate the widening gap between the developed and the developing countries and ensure steadily accelerating economic and social development and peace and justice for present and future generations;See resolution 3201 (S-VI).
8. Reaffirms that the international community should devise ways and means to remove the current obstacles and meet the challenges to the full realization of all human rights and to prevent the continuation of human rights violations resulting therefrom throughout the world;
9. Urges States to continue their efforts, through enhanced international cooperation, towards the promotion of a democratic and equitable international order;
10. Requests the Commission on Human Rights, the human rights treaty bodies, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, the mechanisms of the Commission on Human Rights and the Subcommission on the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights to pay due attention, within their respective mandates, to the present resolution and to make contributions for its implementation;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to bring the present resolution to the attention of Member States, United Nations organs, bodies and components, intergovernmental organizations, in particular the Bretton Woods institutions, and non-governmental organizations and to disseminate it on the widest possible basis;
12. Decides to continue consideration of the matter at its fifty-sixth session under the item entitled "Human rights questions".
RESOLUTION 55/108
Adopted at the 81st plenary meeting, on 4 December 2000, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/55/602/Add.2 and Corr.1, para. 94)The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Botswana (on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries and China), Brazil, Canada, Costa Rica, Croatia, Denmark, El Salvador, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Luxembourg, Mexico, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
55/108. The right to development
The General Assembly,
Guided by the Charter of the United Nations, expressing in particular the determination to promote social progress and better standards of life in larger freedom and to employ international machinery for the promotion of the economic and social advancement of all peoples,
Recalling that the Declaration on the Right to DevelopmentResolution 41/128, annex. confirmed that the right to development is an inalienable human right and that equality of opportunity for development is a prerogative both of nations and of individuals who make up nations,
Noting that the World Conference on Human Rights, held at Vienna from 14 to 25 June 1993, reaffirmed the right to development as a universal and inalienable right and an integral part of all fundamental human rights,See A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.
Recognizing that the Declaration on the Right to Development constitutes an integral link between the Universal Declaration of Human RightsResolution 217 A (III). and the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action adopted by the World Conference on Human Rights on 25 June 1993See A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III. through its elaboration of a holistic vision integrating economic, social and cultural rights with civil and political rights,
Expressing its concern that, more than fifty years after the adoption of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the unacceptable situation of absolute poverty, hunger, disease, lack of adequate shelter, illiteracy and hopelessness remains the lot of over one billion people,
Emphasizing that the promotion, protection and realization of the right to development are an integral part of the promotion and protection of all human rights,
Noting that the human person is the central subject of development and that development policy should therefore make the human being the main participant in and beneficiary of development,
Stressing the importance of creating an economic, political, social, cultural and legal environment that will enable people to achieve social development,
Affirming the need to apply a gender perspective in the implementation of the right to development, inter alia, by ensuring that women play an active role in the development process,
Emphasizing that the empowerment of women and their full participation on the basis of equality in all spheres of society is fundamental for development,
Underlining the fact that the realization of the right to development requires effective development policies at the national level, as well as equitable economic relations and a favourable economic environment at the international level,
Welcoming in this regard the adoption by the General Assembly of the Agenda for Development,Resolution 51/240, annex. which declares that development is one of the main priorities of the United Nations and which aims at invigorating a renewed and strengthened partnership for development, based on the imperatives of mutual benefits and genuine interdependence,
Noting with concern that the Declaration on the Right to Development is insufficiently disseminated and should be taken into account, as appropriate, in bilateral and multilateral cooperation programmes, national development strategies and policies and activities of international organizations,
Recalling the need for coordination and cooperation throughout the United Nations system for a more effective promotion and realization of the right to development,
Underlining the important role of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights in the promotion and protection of the right to development, as mandated in paragraph 4 (c) of General Assembly resolution 48/141 of 20 December 1993,
Recalling its resolution 54/175 of 17 December 1999,
Taking note of Commission on Human Rights resolution 2000/5 of 13 April 2000,See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2000, Supplement No. 3 and corrigendum (E/2000/23 and Corr.1), chap. II, sect. A.
Welcoming the report of the Intergovernmental Group of Experts on the Right to Development on its second session,E/CN.4/1998/29. including the proposed strategy contained therein, and welcoming in particular the recommendation that a follow-up mechanism should be established to ensure promotion and implementation of the Declaration on the Right to Development,
1. Reaffirms the importance of the right to development for every human person and all peoples in all countries, in particular the developing countries, as an integral part of their fundamental human rights, as well as the potential contribution that its realization could make to the full enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms;
2. Recognizes that the passage of more than fifty years since the adoption of the Universal Declaration of Human RightsResolution 217 A (III). demands the strengthening of efforts to place all human rights and, in this context, the right to development in particular, at the top of the global agenda;
3. Reiterates that:
(a) The essence of the right to development is the principle that the human person is the central subject of development and that the right to life includes within it existence in human dignity with the minimum necessities of life;
(b) The existence of widespread absolute poverty inhibits the full and effective enjoyment of human rights and renders democracy and popular participation fragile;
(c) For peace and stability to endure, national action and international action and cooperation are required to promote a better life for all in larger freedom, a critical element of which is the eradication of poverty;
4. Reaffirms that democracy, development and respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms, including the right to development, are interdependent and mutually reinforcing, and in this context affirms that:
(a) The development experiences of countries reflect differences with regard to both progress and setbacks, and that the development spectrum has a wide range, not only between countries but also within countries;
(b) A number of developing countries have experienced rapid economic growth in the recent past and have become dynamic partners in the international economy;
(c) At the same time, the gap between developed and developing countries remains unacceptably wide and developing countries continue to face difficulties in participating in the globalization process, and many risk being marginalized and effectively excluded from its benefits;
(d) Democracy, which is spreading everywhere, has raised development expectations everywhere, that their non-fulfilment risks rekindling non-democratic forces, and that structural reforms that do not take social realities into account could destabilize democratization processes;
(e) Effective popular participation is an essential component of successful and lasting development;
(f) Democracy, respect for all human rights and fundamental freedoms, including the right to development, transparent and accountable governance and administration in all sectors of society, and effective participation by civil society are an essential part of the necessary foundations for the realization of social and people-centred sustainable development;
(g) The participation of developing countries in the international economic decision-making process needs to be broadened and strengthened;
5. Urges all States to eliminate all obstacles to development at all levels by pursuing the promotion and protection of economic, social, cultural, civil and political rights, implementing comprehensive development programmes at the national level, integrating those rights into development activities and promoting effective international cooperation;
6. Reaffirms that all human rights are universal, indivisible, interdependent and interrelated and that the universality, objectivity, impartiality and non-selectivity of the consideration of human rights issues must be ensured;
7. Affirms that international cooperation is acknowledged more than ever as a necessity deriving from recognized mutual interest and, therefore, that such cooperation should be strengthened in order to support the efforts of developing countries to solve their economic and social problems and to fulfil their obligations to promote and protect all human rights;
8. Welcomes the intention of the Secretary-General to give high priority to the right to development, and urges all States to promote further the right to development as a vital element in a balanced human rights programme;
9. Also welcomes the high priority assigned by the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to activities relating to the right to development, and urges the Office of the High Commissioner to continue to implement Commission on Human Rights resolution 1998/72 of 22 April 1998;See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1998, Supplement No. 3 (E/1998/23), chap. II, sect. A.
10. Further welcomes Economic and Social Council decision 1998/269 of 30 July 1998 authorizing the establishment by the Commission on Human Rights of a follow-up mechanism, consisting of an open-ended working group on the right to development and an independent expert with a mandate to submit to the working group at each of its sessions a study on the current state of progress in the implementation of the right to development, as provided for in Commission resolution 1998/72;
11. Welcomes the holding at Geneva from 18 to 22 September 2000 of the first session of the Open-ended Working Group on the Right to Development under the chairmanship of Mr. M. S. Dembri (Algeria), and encourages the Working Group to proceed with its second session, scheduled for January 2001;
12. Takes note of the coordination mechanisms and initiatives within the United Nations system in which the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights participates to promote the implementation of the right to development;
13. Also takes note of the second report of the independent expert on the right to development,See A/55/306. which focuses on poverty eradication as a priority area requiring attention in the realization of the right to development;
14. Further takes note of the Human Development Report 2000, of the United Nations Development Programme,United Nations publication, Sales No. E.00.III.B.8. and the World Development Report 2000/2001: Attacking Poverty, of the World Bank,Published for the World Bank by Oxford University Press, New York, 2000. which cover issues relevant to human rights and the right to development, and welcomes the participation in the Working Group of representatives of international financial institutions, as well as that of relevant United Nations specialized agencies, funds and programmes and non-governmental organizations, in accordance with relevant resolutions of the Economic and Social Council;
15. Invites the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to submit a report to the Commission on Human Rights each year for the duration of the mechanism, to provide interim reports to the Working Group and to make those reports available to the independent expert, with each report covering:
(a) The activities of her Office relating to the implementation of the right to development, as contained in her mandate;
(b) The implementation of resolutions of the General Assembly and the Commission with regard to the right to development;
(c) Inter-agency coordination within the United Nations system for the implementation of relevant resolutions of the Commission in that regard;
16. Urges the United Nations system to continue to support the implementation of the recent resolutions of the Commission on Human Rights regarding the right to development;
17. Calls upon the Secretary-General to ensure that the Working Group and the independent expert receive all necessary assistance, in particular the staff and resources required to fulfil their mandates;
18. Calls upon the Working Group to take note of the deliberations on the right to development during the fifty-fifth session of the General Assembly and the fifty-sixth session of the Commission on Human Rights, and any other issue relevant to the right to development;
19. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its fifty-sixth session and to the Commission on Human Rights at its fifty-seventh session a comprehensive report on the implementation of the various provisions of the present resolution;
20. Decides to continue consideration of this question, as a matter of priority, at its fifty-sixth session.
RESOLUTION 55/109
Adopted at the 81st plenary meeting, on 4 December 2000, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/55/602/Add.2 and Corr.1, para. 94)The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Botswana (on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries and China) and El Salvador.
55/109. Enhancement of international cooperation in the field of human rights
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 54/181 of 17 December 1999, taking note of Commission on Human Rights resolution 2000/70 of 26 April 2000 on the enhancement of international cooperation in the field of human rights,See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2000, Supplement No. 3 and corrigendum (E/2000/23 and Corr.1), chap. II, sect. A. and recalling also Assembly resolution 54/113 of 10 December 1999 on the United Nations Year of Dialogue among Civilizations,
Reaffirming its commitment to promoting international cooperation, as set forth in the Charter of the United Nations, in particular Article 1, paragraph 3, as well as relevant provisions of the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action adopted by the World Conference on Human Rights on 25 June 1993,A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III. for enhancing genuine cooperation among Member States in the field of human rights,
Recognizing that the enhancement of international cooperation in the field of human rights is essential for the full achievement of the purposes of the United Nations, including the effective promotion and protection of all human rights,
Recognizing also the importance of ensuring the universality, objectivity and non-selectivity of the consideration of human rights issues, and underlining the importance of the promotion of dialogue on human rights issues,
Reaffirming that dialogue among religions, cultures and civilizations in the field of human rights could contribute greatly to the enhancement of international cooperation in this field,
Emphasizing the need for further progress in the promotion and encouragement of respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms through, in particular, international cooperation,
Underlining the fact that mutual understanding, dialogue, cooperation, transparency and confidence-building are important elements in all the activities for the promotion and protection of human rights,
Recalling the adoption of resolution 1999/25 of 26 August 1999, entitled "Promotion of dialogue on human rights issues", by the Subcommission on the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights at its fifty-first session,See E/CN.4/2000/2-E/CN.4/Sub.2/1999/54, chap. II, sect. A. and noting its consideration of the question of a dialogue among civilizations at its fifty-second session,
1. Reaffirms that it is one of the purposes of the United Nations and the responsibility of all Member States to promote, protect and encourage respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms through, inter alia, international cooperation;
2. Considers that international cooperation in this field, in conformity with the purposes and principles set out in the Charter of the United Nations and international law, should make an effective and practical contribution to the urgent task of preventing violations of human rights and of fundamental freedoms for all;
3. Reaffirms that the promotion, protection and full realization of all human rights and fundamental freedoms should be guided by the principles of universality, non-selectivity, objectivity and transparency, in a manner consistent with the purposes and principles set out in the Charter;
4. Calls upon Member States, specialized agencies and intergovernmental organizations to continue to carry out a constructive dialogue and consultations for the enhancement of understanding and the promotion and protection of all human rights and fundamental freedoms, and encourages non-governmental organizations to contribute actively to this endeavour;
5. Invites States and relevant United Nations human rights mechanisms and procedures to continue to pay attention to the importance of mutual cooperation, understanding and dialogue in ensuring the promotion and protection of all human rights;
6. Decides to continue its consideration of this question at its fifty-sixth session.
RESOLUTION 55/10
Adopted at the 44th plenary meeting, on 30 October 2000, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/55/L.18 and Add.1, sponsored by: Algeria, Bahrain, Comoros, Djibouti, Egypt, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Mauritania, Morocco, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia, United Arab Emirates, Yemen, Palestine
55/10. Cooperation between the United Nations and the League of Arab States
The General Assembly,
Recalling its previous resolutions on cooperation between the United Nations and the League of Arab States,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on cooperation between the United Nations and the League of Arab States,A/55/401.
Recalling article 3 of the Pact of the League of Arab States,United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 70, No. 241. which entrusts the Council of the League with the function of determining the means whereby the League will collaborate with the international organizations which may be created in the future to guarantee peace and security and organize economic and social relations,
Noting the desire of both organizations to consolidate, develop and enhance further the ties existing between them in the political, economic, social, humanitarian, cultural, technical and administrative fields,
Taking into account the report of the Secretary-General entitled "An Agenda for Peace",A/47/277-S/24111. in particular section VII, concerning cooperation with regional arrangements and organizations, and the "Supplement to An Agenda for Peace",A/50/60-S/1995/1.
Convinced of the need for more efficient and coordinated utilization of available economic and financial resources in order to promote the common objectives of the two organizations,
Acknowledging the need for closer cooperation between the United Nations system and the League of Arab States and its specialized organizations in achieving the goals and objectives of the two organizations,
1. Takes note with satisfaction of the report of the Secretary-General;A/55/401.
2. Commends the continued efforts of the League of Arab States to promote multilateral cooperation among Arab States, and requests the United Nations system to continue to lend its support;
3. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General for the follow-up action taken by him to implement the proposals adopted at the meetings between the representatives of the secretariats of the United Nations and other organizations of the United Nations system and the General Secretariat of the League of Arab States and its specialized organizations, including the sectoral meeting on youth and employment held in Beirut, from 23 to 25 May 2000;
4. Requests the Secretariat of the United Nations and the General Secretariat of the League of Arab States, within their respective fields of competence, to intensify further their cooperation for the realization of the purposes and principles embodied in the Charter of the United Nations, the strengthening of international peace and security, economic and social development, disarmament, decolonization, self-determination and the eradication of all forms of racism and racial discrimination;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to continue his efforts to strengthen cooperation and coordination between the United Nations and other organizations and agencies of the United Nations system and the League of Arab States and its specialized organizations in order to enhance their capacity to serve the mutual interests and objectives of the two organizations in the political, economic, social, humanitarian, cultural and administrative fields;
6. Calls upon the specialized agencies and other organizations and programmes of the United Nations system:
(a) To continue to cooperate with the Secretary-General and among themselves, as well as with the League of Arab States and its specialized organizations, in the follow-up of multilateral proposals aimed at strengthening and expanding cooperation in all fields between the United Nations system and the League of Arab States and its specialized organizations;
(b) To strengthen the capacity of the League of Arab States and of its institutions and specialized organizations to benefit from globalization and information technology and to meet the development challenges of the new millennium;
(c) To step up cooperation and coordination with the specialized organizations of the League of Arab States in the organization of seminars and training courses and in the preparation of studies;
(d) To maintain and increase contacts and improve the mechanism of consultation with the counterpart programmes, organizations and agencies concerned regarding projects and programmes in order to facilitate their implementation;
(e) To participate whenever possible with organizations and institutions of the League of Arab States in the execution and implementation of development projects in the Arab region;
(f) To inform the Secretary-General, not later than 30 June 2001, of the progress made in their cooperation with the League of Arab States and its specialized organizations and, in particular, of the follow-up action taken on the multilateral and bilateral proposals adopted at the previous meetings between the two organizations;
7. Also calls upon the specialized agencies and other organizations and programmes of the United Nations system to increase their cooperation with the League of Arab States and its specialized organizations in the priority sectors of energy, rural development, desertification and green belts, training and vocational education, technology, environment and information and documentation;
8. Requests the Secretary-General of the United Nations, in cooperation with the Secretary-General of the League of Arab States, to encourage periodic consultation between representatives of the Secretariat of the United Nations and of the General Secretariat of the League of Arab States in order to review and strengthen coordination mechanisms with a view to accelerating implementation of, and follow-up action on, the multilateral projects, proposals and recommendations adopted at the meetings between the two organizations;
9. Recommends that the United Nations and all organizations of the United Nations system make the greatest possible use of Arab institutions and technical expertise in projects undertaken in the Arab region;
10. Reaffirms that, in order to enhance cooperation and for the purpose of review and appraisal of progress, a general meeting between representatives of the United Nations system and the League of Arab States should be held once every two years and that joint inter-agency sectoral meetings should also be convened on a biennial basis to address priority areas of major importance to the development of the Arab States, on the basis of agreement between the United Nations system and the League of Arab States and its specialized organizations;
11. Also reaffirms the importance of holding the next general meeting on cooperation between the representatives of the secretariats of organizations of the United Nations system and of the General Secretariat of the League of Arab States and its specialized organizations during 2001;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its fifty-sixth session a report on the implementation of the present resolution;
13. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-sixth session the item entitled "Cooperation between the United Nations and the League of Arab States".
RESOLUTION 55/110
Adopted at the 81st plenary meeting, on 4 December 2000, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/55/602/Add.2 and Corr.1, para. 94),The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Antigua and Barbuda, and Botswana (on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries and China). by a recorded vote of 117 to 49, with 6 abstentions, as follows:
In favour: Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d'Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Palau, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America
Abstentions: Azerbaijan, Fiji, Kazakhstan, Republic of Korea, Ukraine, Uzbekistan
55/110. Human rights and unilateral coercive measures
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 51/103 of 12 December 1996, 52/120 of 12 December 1997, 53/141 of 9 December 1998 and 54/172 of 17 December 1999, as well as Commission on Human Rights resolution 1998/11 of 9 April 1998,See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1998, Supplement No. 3 (E/1998/23), chap. II, sect. A. and taking note of Commission resolution 2000/11 of 17 April 2000,Ibid., 2000, Supplement No. 3 and corrigendum (E/2000/23 and Corr.1), chap. II, sect. A.
Reaffirming the pertinent principles and provisions contained in the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States proclaimed by the General Assembly in its resolution 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974, in particular article 32 thereof, in which it declared that no State may use or encourage the use of economic, political or any other type of measures to coerce another State in order to obtain from it the subordination of the exercise of its sovereign rights,
Taking note of the report submitted by the Secretary-General,E/CN.4/2000/46 and Add.1. pursuant to Commission on Human Rights resolution 1999/21 of 23 April 1999,See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1999, Supplement No. 3 (E/1999/23), chap. II, sect. A. and the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of resolution 52/120,A/53/293 and Add.1.
Recognizing the universal, indivisible, interdependent and interrelated character of all human rights, and, in this regard, reaffirming the right to development as an integral part of all human rights,
Recalling that the World Conference on Human Rights, held at Vienna from 14 to 25 June 1993, called upon States to refrain from any unilateral coercive measure not in accordance with international law and the Charter of the United Nations that creates obstacles to trade relations among States and impedes the full realization of all human rights,See A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III, sect I, para. 31.
Bearing in mind all the references to this question in the Copenhagen Declaration on Social Development, adopted by the World Summit for Social Development on 12 March 1995,Report of the World Summit for Social Development, Copenhagen, 6-12 March 1995 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.8), chap. I, resolution 1, annex I. the Beijing Declaration and the Platform for Action, adopted by the Fourth World Conference on Women on 15 September 1995,Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4-15 September 1995 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13), chap. I, resolution 1, annexes I and II. and the Istanbul Declaration on Human Settlements and the Habitat Agenda, adopted by the second United Nations Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II) on 14 June 1996,Report of the United Nations Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II), Istanbul, 3-14 June 1996 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.97.IV.6), chap. I, resolution 1, annexes I and II.
Expressing its concern about the negative impact of unilateral coercive measures in the field of international relations, trade, investment and cooperation,
Deeply concerned that, despite the recommendations adopted on this question by the General Assembly and recent major United Nations conferences and contrary to general international law and the Charter of the United Nations, unilateral coercive measures continue to be promulgated and implemented with all their negative implications for the social-humanitarian activities and economic and social development of developing countries, including their extraterritorial effects, thereby creating additional obstacles to the full enjoyment of all human rights by peoples and individuals under the jurisdiction of other States,
Bearing in mind all the extraterritorial effects of any unilateral legislative, administrative and economic measures, policies and practices of a coercive nature against the development process and the enhancement of human rights in developing countries, which create obstacles to the full realization of all human rights,
Noting the continuing efforts of the Open-ended Working Group on the Right to Development of the Commission on Human Rights, and reaffirming in particular its criteria according to which unilateral coercive measures are one of the obstacles to the implementation of the Declaration on the Right to Development,Resolution 41/128, annex.
1. Urges all States to refrain from adopting or implementing any unilateral measures not in accordance with international law and the Charter of the United Nations, in particular those of a coercive nature with all their extraterritorial effects, which create obstacles to trade relations among States, thus impeding the full realization of the rights set forth in the Universal Declaration of Human RightsResolution 217 A (III). and other international human rights instruments, in particular the right of individuals and peoples to development;
2. Invites all States to consider adopting administrative or legislative measures, as appropriate, to counteract the extraterritorial application or effects of unilateral coercive measures;
3. Rejects unilateral coercive measures with all their extraterritorial effects as tools for political or economic pressure against any country, in particular against developing countries, because of their negative effects on the realization of all the human rights of vast sectors of their populations, in particular children, women and the elderly;
4. Calls upon Member States that have initiated such measures to commit themselves to their obligations and responsibilities arising from the international human rights instruments to which they are party by revoking such measures at the earliest time possible;
5. Reaffirms, in this context, the right of all peoples to self-determination, by virtue of which they freely determine their political status and freely pursue their economic, social and cultural development;
6. Urges the Commission on Human Rights to take fully into account the negative impact of unilateral coercive measures, including the enactment of national laws and their extraterritorial application, in its task concerning the implementation of the right to development;
7. Requests the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, in discharging her functions relating to the promotion, realization and protection of the right to development and bearing in mind the continuing impact of unilateral coercive measures on the population of developing countries, to give priority to the present resolution in her annual report to the General Assembly;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to bring the present resolution to the attention of all Member States, to continue to collect their views and information on the implications and negative effects of unilateral coercive measures on their populations and to submit an analytical report thereon to the General Assembly at its fifty-sixth session, highlighting the practical and preventive measures in this respect;
9. Decides to examine this question on a priority basis at its fifty-sixth session under the sub-item entitled "Human rights questions, including alternative approaches for improving the effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms".
RESOLUTION 55/111
Adopted at the 81st plenary meeting, on 4 December 2000, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/55/602/Add.2 and Corr.1, para. 94)The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Benin, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Ecuador, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Monaco, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and Venezuela.
55/111. Extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions
The General Assembly,
Recalling the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,Resolution 217 A (III). which guarantees the right to life, liberty and security of person, and the relevant provisions of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
Recalling also its resolutions 47/136 of 18 December 1992, 51/92 of 12 December 1996 and 53/147 of 9 December 1998, as well as Commission on Human Rights resolutions 1992/72 of 5 March 1992See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1992, Supplement No. 2 (E/1992/22), chap. II, sect. A. and 1998/68 of 21 April 1998,Ibid., 1998, Supplement No. 3 (E/1998/23), chap. II, sect. A. and taking note of Commission resolution 2000/31 of 20 April 2000,Ibid., 2000, Supplement No. 3 and corrigendum (E/2000/23 and Corr.1), chap. II, sect. A.
Recalling further Economic and Social Council resolution 1984/50 of 25 May 1984 and the safeguards guaranteeing protection of the rights of those facing the death penalty annexed thereto and Council resolution 1989/64 of 24 May 1989 on their implementation, as well as the Declaration of Basic Principles of Justice for Victims of Crime and Abuse of Power, adopted by the General Assembly in its resolution 40/34 of 29 November 1985,
Deeply alarmed at the persistence, on a large scale, of extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions in all parts of the world,
Dismayed that in a number of countries impunity, the negation of justice, continues to prevail and often remains the main cause of the continuing occurrence of extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions in those countries,
Recognizing the contribution of the establishment of the International Criminal Court with regard to ensuring effective prosecution concerning executions in serious violation of article 3 common to the four Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949,United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, Nos. 970-973. without previous judgement pronounced by a regularly constituted court affording all judicial guarantees that are generally recognized as indispensable,
Convinced of the need for effective action to combat and eliminate the abhorrent practice of extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions, which represent a flagrant violation of the fundamental right to life,
1. Strongly condemns once again all the extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions that continue to take place throughout the world;
2. Notes that impunity continues to be a major cause of the perpetuation of violations of human rights, including extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions;
3. Acknowledges the historic significance of the adoption of the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court,A/CONF.183/9. and the fact that a significant number of States have already signed and/or ratified the Statute, and calls upon all States to consider signing and ratifying the Statute;
4. Demands that all Governments ensure that the practice of extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions be brought to an end and that they take effective action to combat and eliminate the phenomenon in all its forms;
5. Takes note of the interim report of the Special Rapporteur of the Commission on Human Rights on extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions,See A/55/288. including the attention given therein to various aspects and situations involving violations of the right to life by extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions;
6. Reiterates the obligation of all Governments to conduct exhaustive and impartial investigations into all suspected cases of extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions, to identify and bring to justice those responsible, while ensuring the right of every person to a fair and public hearing by a competent, independent and impartial tribunal established by law, to grant adequate compensation to the victims or their families and to adopt all necessary measures, including legal and judicial measures, in order to bring an end to impunity, to prevent the recurrence of such executions;
7. Calls upon Governments concerned to investigate promptly and thoroughly cases in various parts of the world of killings committed in the name of passion or in the name of honour, persons killed for reasons related to their peaceful activities as human rights defenders or as journalists, racially motivated violence leading to the death of the victim as well as other persons whose right to life has been violated, and to bring those responsible to justice before an independent and impartial judiciary, and to ensure that such killings are neither condoned nor sanctioned by government officials or personnel;
8. Urges Governments to undertake all necessary and possible measures to prevent loss of life, in particular that of children, during public demonstrations, internal and communal violence, civil unrest and public emergencies or armed conflict, and to ensure that the police and security forces receive thorough training in human rights matters, in particular with regard to restrictions on the use of force and firearms in the discharge of their functions;
9. Stresses the importance for States to take effective measures to end impunity with regard to extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions, inter alia, through the adoption of preventive measures, and calls upon Governments to ensure that such measures are included in post-conflict peace-building efforts;
10. Encourages the Special Rapporteur to continue, within the framework of her mandate, to collect information from all concerned and to seek the views and comments of Governments so as to be able to respond effectively to reliable information that comes before her and to follow up communications and country visits;
11. Reaffirms Economic and Social Council decision 1998/265 of 30 July 1998, in which the Council endorsed the decision of the Commission on Human Rights, in its resolution 1998/68, to extend the mandate of the Special Rapporteur for three years;
12. Notes the important role the Special Rapporteur has played in the elimination of extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions;
13. Also notes that the Commission, in its resolution 2000/31, requested the Special Rapporteur, in carrying out her mandate:
(a) To continue to examine situations of extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions and to submit her findings on an annual basis, together with conclusions and recommendations, to the Commission, as well as such other reports as the Special Rapporteur deems necessary in order to keep the Commission informed about serious situations of extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions that warrant its immediate attention;
(b) To respond effectively to information that comes before her, in particular when an extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary execution is imminent or seriously threatened or when such an execution has occurred;
(c) To enhance further her dialogue with Governments, as well as to follow up on recommendations made in reports after visits to particular countries;
(d) To continue to pay special attention to extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions of children and to allegations concerning violations of the right to life in the context of violence against participants in demonstrations and other peaceful public manifestations or against persons belonging to minorities;
(e) To pay special attention to extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions where the victims are individuals carrying out peaceful activities in defence of human rights and fundamental freedoms;
(f) To continue monitoring the implementation of existing international standards on safeguards and restrictions relating to the imposition of capital punishment, bearing in mind the comments made by the Human Rights Committee in its interpretation of article 6 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex. as well as the Second Optional Protocol thereto;Resolution 44/128, annex.
(g) To apply a gender perspective in her work;
14. Strongly urges all Governments, in particular those that have not yet done so, to respond without undue delay to the communications and requests for information transmitted to them by the Special Rapporteur, and urges them and all others concerned to cooperate with and assist the Special Rapporteur so that she may carry out her mandate effectively, including, where appropriate, by issuing invitations to the Special Rapporteur when she so requests;
15. Expresses its appreciation to those Governments that have invited the Special Rapporteur to visit their countries, asks them to examine carefully the recommendations made by the Special Rapporteur and invites them to report to the Special Rapporteur on the actions taken on those recommendations, and requests other Governments to cooperate in a similar way;
16. Encourages Governments, international organizations and non-governmental organizations to organize training programmes and to support projects with a view to training or educating military forces, law enforcement officers and government officials, as well as members of United Nations peacekeeping or observer missions, in human rights and humanitarian law issues connected with their work, and appeals to the international community to support endeavours to that end;
17. Urges the Special Rapporteur to continue to bring to the attention of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights such situations of extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions as are of particularly serious concern to her or where early action might prevent further deterioration;
18. Welcomes the cooperation established between the Special Rapporteur and other United Nations mechanisms and procedures relating to human rights, as well as with medical and forensic experts, and encourages the Special Rapporteur to continue efforts in that regard;
19. Calls upon the Governments of all States in which the death penalty has not been abolished to comply with their obligations under relevant provisions of international human rights instruments, keeping in mind the safeguards and guarantees referred to in Economic and Social Council resolutions 1984/50 and 1989/64;
20. Again requests the Secretary-General to continue to use his best endeavours in cases where the minimum standard of legal safeguards provided for in articles 6, 9, 14 and 15 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights appears not to have been respected;
21. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the Special Rapporteur with an adequate and stable level of human, financial and material resources to enable her to carry out her mandate effectively, including through country visits;
22. Also requests the Secretary-General to continue, in close collaboration with the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, in conformity with the High Commissioner's mandate established by the General Assembly in its resolution 48/141 of 20 December 1993, to ensure that personnel specialized in human rights and humanitarian law issues form part of United Nations missions, where appropriate, in order to deal with serious violations of human rights, such as extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions;
23. Requests the Special Rapporteur to submit an interim report to the General Assembly at its fifty-seventh session on the situation worldwide in regard to extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions and her recommendations for more effective action to combat that phenomenon.
RESOLUTION 55/112
Adopted at the 81st plenary meeting, on 4 December 2000, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/55/602/Add.3, para. 49)The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Costa Rica, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Monaco, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Romania, San Marino, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of America.
55/112. Situation of human rights in Myanmar
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming that all Member States have an obligation to promote and protect human rights and fundamental freedoms, as stated in the Charter of the United Nations and elaborated in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,Resolution 217 A (III). the International Covenants on Human RightsResolution 2200 A (XXI), annex. and other applicable human rights instruments,
Aware that, in accordance with the Charter, the United Nations promotes and encourages respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms for all and that the Universal Declaration of Human Rights states that the will of the people shall be the basis of the authority of government, and therefore expressing its grave concern that the Government of Myanmar has still not implemented its commitment to take all necessary steps towards democracy in the light of the results of the elections held in 1990,
Recalling its resolution 54/186 of 17 December 1999 and Commission on Human Rights resolution 1992/58 of 3 March 1992,See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1992, Supplement No. 2 (E/1992/22), chap. II, sect. A. in which the Commission, inter alia, decided to nominate a special rapporteur with a given mandate, and taking note of Commission resolution 2000/23 of 18 April 2000,Ibid., 2000, Supplement No. 3 and corrigendum (E/2000/23 and Corr.1), chap. II, sect. A. in which the Commission decided to extend for one year the mandate of its Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in Myanmar,
Recalling also the observation made by the Special Rapporteur that the absence of respect for the rights pertaining to democratic governance is at the root of all major violations of human rights in Myanmar,
Still gravely concerned at the deterioration of the human rights situation in Myanmar, especially the unabated suppression of the exercise of political rights and freedom of thought, expression, association and movement in Myanmar, as reported by the Special Rapporteur, and deeply concerned that new restrictions have been placed on Aung San Suu Kyi and other members of the National League for Democracy,
Also gravely concerned that the legal system is effectively used as an instrument of oppression and at the increasing intimidation and detention of lawyers,
Recognizing that the systematic violations of civil, political, economic, social and cultural rights by the Government of Myanmar have had a significant adverse effect on the health and welfare of the people of Myanmar,
Noting with interest the two recent visits to Myanmar by the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General and the cooperation extended by the Government of Myanmar in that regard,
Deeply regretting the failure of the Government of Myanmar to cooperate fully with the relevant United Nations mechanisms, in particular the Special Rapporteur, who still has not been invited to Myanmar, despite assurances by the Government of Myanmar in 1999 that it would seriously consider a visit,
1. Expresses its appreciation to the Special Rapporteur of the Commission on Human Rights on the situation of human rights in Myanmar for his interim report,See A/55/359. and calls upon the Government of Myanmar to implement fully the recommendations made by the Special Rapporteur;
2. Urges the Government of Myanmar to cooperate fully and without further delay with the Special Rapporteur, and to allow him urgently, without preconditions, to conduct a field mission and to establish direct contacts with the Government and all other relevant sectors of society, thus enabling him fully to discharge his mandate;
3. Notes with satisfaction the continued cooperation with the International Committee of the Red Cross, allowing the Committee to communicate with and visit detainees in accordance with its modalities of work, and hopes that the programme will be pursued further;
4. Deplores the continued violations of human rights in Myanmar, including extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions, enforced disappearances, rape, torture, inhuman treatment, mass arrests, forced labour, including the use of children, forced relocation and denial of freedom of assembly, association, expression and movement, as reported by the Special Rapporteur;
5. Expresses its grave concern at the increasingly systematic policy of the Government of Myanmar to persecute the democratic opposition, members of the National League for Democracy, sympathizers and their families, and ethnic opposition parties, and at the use by the Government of intimidatory methods such as arbitrary arrest and detention and abuse of the legal system, including harsh long-term prison sentences, mass rallies and media campaigns, which have forced many to refrain from exercising their legitimate political rights;
6. Urges the Government of Myanmar to cease, without delay, all activities aimed at preventing the free exercise of internationally recognized human rights, including freedom of association, assembly, movement and speech, and in particular to remove all restrictions on the freedom of movement of Aung San Suu Kyi and other members of the National League for Democracy and on their freedom to communicate with the outside world;
7. Strongly urges the Government of Myanmar to release immediately and unconditionally detained political leaders and all political prisoners, including journalists, to ensure their physical integrity and to permit them to participate in the process of national reconciliation;
8. Expresses its concern that the composition and working procedures of the National Convention do not permit either Members of Parliament-elect or representatives of the ethnic minorities to express their views freely, and urges the Government of Myanmar to seek new and constructive ways to promote national reconciliation and to restore democracy, through, inter alia, the establishment of a time frame for action;
9. Strongly urges the Government of Myanmar, taking into account the assurances it has given on various occasions, to take all necessary steps towards the restoration of democracy, in accordance with the will of the people, as expressed in the democratic elections held in 1990 and, to that end, without delay, to engage in a substantive political dialogue with political leaders, including Aung San Suu Kyi, and representatives of ethnic groups, and, in that context, notes the existence of the committee representing the People's Parliament;
10. Notes with grave concern that the Government of Myanmar has failed to cease its widespread and systematic use of forced labour of its own people and to meet all three recommendations of the International Labour Organization on that issue; this failure has compelled the International Labour Organization to limit strictly further cooperation with the Government and has prompted the International Labour Conference to adopt, subject to certain conditions, a number of measures to secure compliance by the Government of Myanmar with the recommendations of the Commission of Inquiry established to examine the observance of International Labour Organization Convention No. 29 concerning forced or compulsory labour, of 1930;
11. Notes the recent visit by the technical cooperation mission of the International Labour Organization to Myanmar and the cooperation extended to the mission, while awaiting the results of the mission;
12. Strongly urges the Government of Myanmar to implement fully concrete legislative, executive and administrative measures to eradicate the practice of forced labour, in conformity with the relevant recommendations of the Commission of Inquiry;
13. Welcomes the reopening of most university courses, but remains concerned that the right to education continues to be a right that is exercised only by those willing to refrain from exercising their civil and political rights and concerned at the reduction in the length of the academic year, the division of the student population and its dispersal to distant campuses and the lack of adequate resources;
14. Deplores the continued violations of human rights, in particular those directed against persons belonging to ethnic and religious minorities, including summary executions, rape, torture, forced labour, forced portering, forced relocations, use of anti-personnel landmines, destruction of crops and fields and dispossession of land and property, which deprives those persons of all means of subsistence and results in large-scale displacement of persons and flows of refugees to neighbouring countries, with negative effects for those countries, and an increasing number of internally displaced persons;
15. Urges the Government of Myanmar to end the systematic enforced displacement of persons and other causes of refugee flows to neighbouring countries and to create conditions conducive to their voluntary return and full reintegration in conditions of safety and dignity and to allow the safe and unhindered access of humanitarian personnel to assist in the return and reintegration process;
16. Deplores the continued violations of the human rights of women, especially women who are refugees, are internally displaced or belong to ethnic minorities or the political opposition, in particular forced labour, trafficking, sexual violence and exploitation, including rape, as reported by the Special Rapporteur;See A/55/359.
17. Strongly urges the Government of Myanmar to implement fully the recommendations made by the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women, in particular the request to prosecute and punish those who violate the human rights of women, and to carry out human rights education and gender-sensitization training, in particular for military personnel;
18. Deplores the recruitment of children as soldiers, in particular children belonging to ethnic minorities, and strongly urges the Government of Myanmar and all other parties to the hostilities in Myanmar to end the use of children as soldiers;
19. Expresses its concern at the growing incidence of human immunodeficiency virus/acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (HIV/AIDS) infection, and urges the Government of Myanmar urgently to address this issue, which will have a serious long-term impact on the development of the country, and to ensure that the health system receives sufficient funding to enable health workers to meet the right of all people to the highest possible standard of health care;
20. Expresses its grave concern at the high rates of malnutrition among pre-school-aged children, which constitute serious violations of their rights to adequate food and the highest attainable standard of health and may have serious repercussions for the health and development of the affected children;
21. Strongly urges the Government of Myanmar to ensure full respect for all human rights and fundamental freedoms, including economic and social rights, and to fulfil its obligation to restore the independence of the judiciary and due process and to end the impunity of and bring to justice any perpetrators of human rights violations, including members of the military, and to investigate and prosecute alleged violations committed by government agents in all circumstances;
22. Welcomes the report of the Secretary-General on the visit of his Special Envoy to Myanmar,A/55/509. endorses the appeal of the Special Envoy for the initiation of a process of dialogue that would lead to national reconciliation, and supports his efforts to achieve such a dialogue;
23. Requests the Secretary-General to continue his discussions on the situation of human rights and the restoration of democracy with the Government of Myanmar, to submit additional reports to the General Assembly during its fifty-fifth session on the progress of those discussions, and to report to the Assembly at its fifty-sixth session and to the Commission on Human Rights at its fifty-seventh session on the progress made in the implementation of the present resolution;
24. Decides to continue its consideration of this question at its fifty-sixth session.
RESOLUTION 55/113
Adopted at the 81st plenary meeting, on 4 December 2000, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/55/602/Add.3, para. 49)The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Canada, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Jordan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Monaco, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Turkey, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of America.
55/113. Situation of human rights in parts of South-Eastern Europe
The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind all relevant resolutions on this subject, in particular Commission on Human Rights resolution 2000/26 of 18 April 2000,See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2000, Supplement No. 3 and corrigendum (E/2000/23 and Corr.1), chap. II, sect. A. and all Security Council resolutions and presidential statements,
Guided by the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,Resolution 217 A (III). the International Covenants on Human RightsResolution 2200 A (XXI), annex. and other human rights instruments, the 1951 Convention relating to the Status of Refugees,United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 189, No. 2545. the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949 for the protection of victims of warIbid., vol. 75, Nos. 970-973. and the Additional Protocols thereto, of 1977,Ibid., vol. 1125, Nos. 17512 and 17513.
Taking note of the principles and commitments undertaken by participating States of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
Reaffirming the territorial integrity of all States in the region, within their internationally recognized borders, taking fully into account all relevant Security Council resolutions,
Expressing its full support for the General Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina and the annexes thereto (collectively the "Peace Agreement"),S/1995/999, annex. which, inter alia, committed the parties in Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Republic of Croatia and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia to respect human rights fully, in particular issues surrounding the return of refugees,
Expressing its support for the democratic forces and non-governmental organizations in the promotion and protection of human rights and in strengthening civil society, and noting in this regard the opportunities afforded by the Stability Pact for South-Eastern Europe, which was adopted at Cologne, Germany, on 10 June 1999,
Welcoming the admission of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia into the framework of the Stability Pact for South-Eastern Europe at the extraordinary session of the Regional Table of the Pact, held at Bucharest on 26 October 2000,
Noting the importance of the respect for the rights of all persons belonging to minorities,
Welcoming all contributions of the Office of the High Representative, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, the Special Rapporteur of the Commission on Human Rights and other entities of the United Nations, the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, the Council of Europe, the European Community Monitoring Mission, Governments and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations in the area in 2000,
Recalling Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998) of 31 March 1998, 1199 (1998) of 23 September 1998, 1203 (1998) of 24 October 1998, 1239 (1999) of 14 May 1999 and 1244 (1999) of 10 June 1999, and the general principles annexed to that resolution, as well as the statement made on 24 March 1998 by the Chairman of the Commission on Human Rights at the fifty-fourth session of the Commission,See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1998, Supplement No. 3 (E/1998/23), chap. III, sect. E, para. 28. Commission on Human Rights resolutions 1998/79 of 22 April 1998Ibid., chap. II, sect. A. and 1999/2 of 13 April 1999,Ibid., 1999, Supplement No. 3 (E/1999/23), chap. II, sect. A. and the report of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights of 27 September 1999 on the situation of human rights in Kosovo,E/CN.4/2000/10.
Recalling also its condemnation of the Serbian military offensive against the civilian population of Kosovo, which resulted in war crimes and gross violations of international human rights and international humanitarian law being inflicted upon the Kosovars,
Condemning all violations of human rights in Kosovo, which have affected all ethnic groups in Kosovo, in particular the harassment and murder of ethnic Serb, Roma and other minorities of Kosovo by ethnic Albanian extremists,
Expressing concern that the entire population of Kosovo has been affected by the conflict there and its aftermath, and stressing that all of the national, ethnic, religious or linguistic minorities there must benefit from their full and equal rights, without discrimination,
Stressing, in this context, the importance of the International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991,
Distressed by the detention in Serbia of political prisoners of Kosovar Albanian or other origin, in violation of international human rights law and standards, but welcoming the pledge of authorities there to abide by international norms in carrying out judicial procedures in this and all other areas of judicial responsibility,
1. Reiterates its call for the full and consistent implementation of the General Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina and the annexes thereto (collectively the "Peace Agreement")S/1995/999, annex. by all parties;
2. Stresses the crucial role of human rights in the successful implementation of the Peace Agreement, and underlines the obligations of all parties under the Peace Agreement to comply with international human rights law and to secure for all persons within their jurisdiction the highest level of international norms and standards of human rights and fundamental freedoms, including the rule of law and effective administration of justice at all levels of government, the freedom and independence of the media, freedom of expression, freedom of association, including with respect to political parties, freedom of religion and freedom of movement;
3. Also stresses the need for enhanced international efforts to foster and effect the prompt and voluntary return of displaced persons and refugees in safety and with dignity;
4. Condemns the growing problem of trafficking in women in the region, and calls upon all concerned authorities to combat actively this criminal practice;
5. Urges all States and parties to the Peace Agreement that have not done so to meet their obligations to cooperate fully with the International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991, as required by Security Council resolution 827 (1993) of 25 May 1993 and all subsequent relevant resolutions, and in particular to comply with their obligations to arrest and transfer to the custody of the Tribunal those indicted persons present in their territories or under their control;
6. Notes that varying degrees of progress have been made in the human rights situation in all States and by all parties to the Peace Agreement, but that substantial efforts remain to be made in several areas;
7. Reiterates its call upon all States and parties to the Peace Agreement to ensure that the promotion and protection of human rights and effective, functioning democratic institutions will be central elements in developing civilian structures;
8. Notes the progress made by Bosnia and Herzegovina in the implementation of the Peace Agreement;
9. Also notes the progress made with regard to refugee returns in Bosnia and Herzegovina, while calling upon all authorities actively to support the return process for minority refugees and internally displaced persons, inter alia, through the eviction of illegal occupants of housing intended for internally displaced persons and refugees, in particular in areas of the Republika Srpska with a majority population of Bosnian Serbs and areas of the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina with a majority population of Bosnian Croats;
10. Welcomes the "Constituent Peoples" decision of the Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina, which reflects the commitment of Bosnia and Herzegovina to meeting the highest standards of human rights and fundamental freedoms;
11. Condemns the harassment of returning minority refugees and internally displaced persons in Bosnia and Herzegovina, including the destruction of their homes, in particular in areas of the Republika Srpska with a majority population of Bosnian Serbs and areas of the Federation with a majority population of Bosnian Croats;
12. Also condemns recurrent instances of religious discrimination and the denial to religious minorities of their right to rebuild religious sites in Bosnia and Herzegovina, in particular in the territory of the Republika Srpska;
13. Further condemns the manipulation of the press by political parties and government officials, including the selective application of slander and tax laws to harass journalists and editors;
14. Calls upon all authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina, in particular those within the Republika Srpska, to cooperate fully with the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia;
15. Calls upon the authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina, including those of the Republika Srpska and the Federation:
(a) To implement the decisions of the High Representative and to fulfil their obligations under the Peace Agreement and the declarations of the Peace Implementation Council;
(b) To implement the decisions of the Commission on Human Rights on Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Office of the Human Rights Ombudsman and the Human Rights Chamber, and the decisions of the Commission for Real Property Claims of Displaced Persons and Refugees;
(c) To establish a fully staffed and funded judiciary which effectively protects the rights of all citizens;
(d) To adopt an effective and fair election law, in cooperation with the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe;
(e) To implement fully all the provisions of the New York Declaration adopted on 15 November 1999;S/1999/1179, annex.
(f) To support the work of the common institutions and implement fully the actions mandated by the Peace Implementation Council at its ministerial meeting held at Brussels on 23 and 24 May 2000;
16. Welcomes the political change following the recent elections in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, which shows the clear decision of the people to choose democracy, respect for human rights and integration into the international community over dictatorship and isolation, and looks forward to the new authorities ensuring respect for the rule of law and for the promotion and protection of human rights;
17. Also welcomes the admission of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia to membership in the United Nations;
18. Further welcomes the commitment of, and encourages efforts by, the new democratic authorities of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia to investigate past abuses of human rights, including violations of the human rights of ethnic groups in Kosovo, the repression and harassment of peaceful political activists, illegal and/or hidden detentions, and other violations of human rights and fundamental freedoms;
19. Welcomes the appointment by the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights of the Special Envoy on persons deprived of liberty in connection with the Kosovo crisis in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, and calls upon all authorities to cooperate with the Special Envoy;
20. Also welcomes the commitment of the new democratic authorities of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia to promoting and protecting free and independent media, and looks forward to welcoming the repeal of any laws that hinder the full and free exercise of human rights and fundamental freedoms in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia;
21. Calls upon all authorities of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia to respect the rights of all persons belonging to any of its national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities;
22. Welcomes the commitment by the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia to implement fully and in good faith its obligations under the Peace Agreement and to abide by the terms of Security Council resolution 1244 (1999), and calls upon the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia to cooperate with the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and other humanitarian organizations to alleviate the suffering of refugees and internally displaced persons, to protect them, and to assist their voluntary return to their homes in safety and with dignity;
23. Encourages States to consider providing additional voluntary contributions to support the new democratic authorities so that they may meet the pressing human rights and humanitarian needs in the area;
24. Calls upon the authorities of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia to comply with their obligation to cooperate fully with the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, and welcomes the announced reopening of the Office of the International Tribunal in Belgrade and the pledge of the authorities of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia to cooperate with it;
25. Underlines the obligation of the authorities of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia to abide by the terms of Council resolution 1244 (1999) and the general principles on a political solution to the Kosovo crisis adopted on 6 May 1999 and annexed to that resolution;
26. Reaffirms that the human rights and humanitarian situation in Kosovo shall be addressed within the framework of a political solution based and built upon the general principles set out in the annex to Council resolution 1244 (1999);
27. Welcomes the efforts of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo and the Kosovo Force, and calls upon all parties in Kosovo and the authorities of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia to cooperate fully with the Mission and the Force in the fulfilment of their respective mandates;
28. Encourages States to consider providing additional voluntary contributions to support the Mission in meeting the pressing administrative, human rights and humanitarian needs in the area;
29. Welcomes the work in Kosovo of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the efforts of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe;
30. Recognizes the strong efforts of the Mission, the United Nations civilian police and the Kosovo Police Service in developing and training the core of a multi-ethnic local police force throughout Kosovo;
31. Calls upon all parties in Kosovo to cooperate with the Mission to ensure full respect for all human rights and fundamental freedoms and democratic norms in Kosovo;
32. Urges all parties in Kosovo to support and strengthen a multi-ethnic society in Kosovo that respects the rights of all persons belonging to minorities and that includes them in all provisional and new civil administration institutions in Kosovo, and to support the Mission fully in this regard;
33. Welcomes the recent holding of peaceful municipal elections in Kosovo, which is a landmark in the democratic development of Kosovo and in the implementation of Council resolution 1244 (1999), and commends in this regard the support by all parties of the efforts of the Mission;
34. Commends the Mission for its efforts to create an independent and impartial judiciary system in Kosovo, and urges all local Serb and Albanian leaders, and the leaders of other minorities in Kosovo, to take all steps necessary to support these efforts;
35. Calls upon all local Kosovar officials, ethnic representatives and all individuals to respect the right to freedom of opinion and expression for all points of view, the right to a free, independent media and the right to freedom of religion;
36. Calls upon the authorities in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, and the representatives of all ethnic groups in Kosovo, to condemn all acts of terrorism and forced evictions from homes or places of work of any resident of Kosovo, whatever the ethnic background of the victim and whoever the perpetrators, to refrain from all acts of violence and to use their influence and leadership to bring all parties to cooperate fully with the Force and the Mission in stopping these incidents and in bringing the perpetrators to justice;
37. Stresses the importance of the return of refugees and of all displaced persons, whatever their ethnic background, and expresses its concern about reports of continuing harassment or other impediments in this regard;
38. Also stresses the importance for, and the responsibility of, all parties in Kosovo to suppress all harassment of individuals or groups of any background and to create a secure environment that will offer to all those who wish to remain in Kosovo, irrespective of ethnic origin, a genuine possibility of doing so;
39. Further stresses the urgent need for all ethnic groups to cooperate with the Mission and the Force to rebuild and strengthen common institutions for all and to desist from creating any sort of parallel institutions;
40. Calls upon the authorities of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia to release those persons detained and transferred from Kosovo to other parts of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, or to specify the charge under which each individual is detained and to afford them due process of law, and to guarantee their families and non-governmental organizations and international observers unimpeded and regular access to those who remain in detention, and, in this regard, welcomes as a first important step the release of the prominent human rights activist, Flora Brovina, and the release of twenty-three additional detainees;
41. Calls upon the authorities of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, and all local Kosovo ethnic Serb and Albanian leaders, to provide information on the fate and whereabouts of the high number of missing persons from Kosovo, and encourages the International Committee of the Red Cross, in this regard, to continue its clarification efforts, in cooperation with other organizations;
42. Expresses its concern about the forced ethnic division of any part of Kosovo as being contrary to Council resolution 1244 (1999) and to the guiding principles of the Rambouillet accords,S/1999/648, annex. and stresses the need for all parties in Kosovo to take all necessary measures to prevent or reverse any action that de facto or de jure permits such ethnic cantonization;
43. Condemns all trafficking in women by any party in Kosovo, and calls upon the local authorities and the Mission to take all steps necessary to prevent and stop it;
44. Requests the Special Rapporteur of the Commission on Human Rights on the situation of human rights in Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Republic of Croatia and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia to continue to monitor closely the situation of human rights in Kosovo, and to report his findings to the Commission at its fifty-seventh session and to the General Assembly at its fifty-sixth session;
45. Decides to continue its examination of this question at its fifty-sixth session under the item entitled "Human rights questions".
RESOLUTION 55/114
Adopted at the 81st plenary meeting, on 4 December 2000, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/55/602/Add.3, para. 49),The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Costa Rica, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Monaco, Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Portugal, San Marino, Spain, Sweden, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of America. by a recorded vote of 67 to 54, with 46 abstentions, as follows:
In favour: Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Barbados, Belgium, Belize, Bolivia, Bulgaria, Canada, Costa Rica, Côte d'Ivoire, Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominica, Ecuador, El Salvador, Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritius, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia, Nauru, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Palau, Papua New Guinea, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Spain, Suriname, Sweden, Trinidad and Tobago, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Vanuatu, Yugoslavia
Against: Afghanistan, Algeria, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belarus, Benin, Bhutan, Brunei Darussalam, Chad, China, Comoros, Congo, Cuba, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Egypt, Gambia, Ghana, Guyana, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Maldives, Morocco, Myanmar, Oman, Pakistan, Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Togo, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, United Republic of Tanzania, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Zimbabwe
Abstentions: Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Bahamas, Botswana, Brazil, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Chile, Colombia, Croatia, Cyprus, Dominican Republic, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Georgia, Guinea, Haiti, Jamaica, Kenya, Lesotho, Malawi, Mali, Mexico, Mozambique, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Republic of Korea, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Singapore, South Africa, Swaziland, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, Uruguay
55/114. Situation of human rights in the Islamic Republic of Iran
The General Assembly,
Guided by the Charter of the United Nations, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,Resolution 217 A (III). the International Covenants on Human RightsResolution 2200 A (XXI), annex. and other human rights instruments,
Reaffirming that all Member States have an obligation to promote and protect human rights and fundamental freedoms and to fulfil the obligations they have undertaken under the various international instruments in this field,
Mindful that the Islamic Republic of Iran is a party to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex. the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights,Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex. the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial DiscriminationResolution 2106 A (XX), annex. and the Convention on the Rights of the Child,Resolution 44/25, annex.
Recalling its previous resolutions on the subject, the most recent of which is resolution 54/177 of 17 December 1999, and taking note of Commission on Human Rights resolution 2000/28 of 18 April 2000,See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2000, Supplement No.3 and corrigendum (E/2000/23 and Corr.1), chap. II, sect. A.
1. Welcomes:
(a) The interim report of the Special Representative of the Commission on Human Rights on the situation of human rights in the Islamic Republic of Iran;A/55/363.
(b) The broad participation in the parliamentary elections held during February and March 2000, which expressed the true commitment of the Iranian people to the democratic process in the Islamic Republic of Iran;
(c) The commitment made by the Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran to promote respect for the rule of law, including the elimination of arbitrary arrest and detention, and to reform the judicial and penitentiary system and bring it into line with international human rights standards in this field;
(d) The visit to the Islamic Republic of Iran of a technical cooperation needs assessment mission of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, and encourages the follow-up to that mission;
2. Notes:
(a) The provisions of the new code of penal procedure, which provide for the attendance of lawyers for all kinds of lawsuits, and the judiciary reform project, which aims, in particular, at re-establishing a distinction between the offices of the judge and the prosecutor;
(b) The legal changes recently put into effect within the Iranian judicial system by which members of religious minorities are no longer obliged to state their religion when applying for a marriage licence;
(c) Developments observed with regard to the status of women in areas such as education, training and health;
(d) The bill currently under consideration that aims at raising the age of marriage;
(e) The work of the Islamic Human Rights Commission on the human rights situation in the Islamic Republic of Iran and, in particular, its efforts to investigate illegal detentions and disappearances;
3. Expresses its concern:
(a) At the fact that, since 1996, no invitation has yet been extended by the Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran to the Special Representative to visit the country;
(b) At the deterioration of the situation with regard to freedom of opinion and expression, in particular at restrictions on the freedom of the press, judiciary suspension of numerous newspapers, prohibition of publications and the arrest of journalists, political activists and intellectuals on the basis of laws related to national security, which are used as a pretext to deny or restrict freedom of expression, opinion and thought;
(c) At the continuing violations of human rights in the Islamic Republic of Iran, in particular executions, in the apparent absence of respect for internationally recognized safeguards, and cases of torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment;
(d) At the failure to comply fully with international standards in the administration of justice and the absence of guarantees of due process of law and respect for internationally recognized legal safeguards, inter alia, with respect to persons belonging to religious minorities;
(e) At the discrimination against persons belonging to religious minorities, in particular the unabated pattern of persecution of the Baha'is, including the continuing detention and the sentencing to death of some of them;
(f) At the continuing discrimination, in law and in practice, against women, who still lack full and equal enjoyment of their human rights, as reported by the Special Representative;
4. Calls upon the Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran:
(a) To invite the Special Rapporteur of the Commission on Human Rights on religious intolerance to visit the country and to resume its full cooperation with him, in particular so that he may study the evolution of the human rights situation in the country, including through direct contacts with all sectors of society, and to make full use of technical cooperation programmes in the field of human rights;
(b) To give effect, in the near future, to its invitation to the Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances to visit the Islamic Republic of Iran;
(c) To consolidate respect for human rights and the rule of law and to abide by its freely undertaken obligations under the International Covenants on Human RightsResolution 2200 A (XXI), annex. and under other international human rights instruments;
(d) To make efforts to ensure the full application of due process of law and fair and transparent procedures by the judiciary and, in this context, to ensure the respect for the rights of the defence and the equity of the verdicts in all instances, including for members of religious minority groups;
(e) To ensure that capital punishment will not be imposed for crimes other than the most serious and will not be pronounced in disregard of the provisions of the International Covenant on Civil and Political RightsResolution 2200 A (XXI), annex. and United Nations safeguards and to provide the Special Representative with relevant statistics on this matter;
(f) To accelerate the process of the investigation into the suspicious deaths and killings of intellectuals and political activists and to bring the alleged perpetrators to justice;
(g) To eliminate all forms of discrimination based on religious grounds or against persons belonging to minorities;
(h) To implement fully the conclusions and recommendations of the Special Representative with regard to religious intolerance relating to the Baha'is and other minority religious groupsIbid., para. 110. until they are completely emancipated;
(i) To take all necessary steps to end the use of torture and other forms of cruel, inhuman and degrading punishment, in particular the practice of amputation;
(j) To take further measures to promote full and equal enjoyment by women of their human rights;
5. Decides to continue the examination of the situation of human rights in the Islamic Republic of Iran, including the situation of minority groups such as the Baha'is, at its fifty-sixth session, under the item entitled "Human rights questions", in the light of additional elements provided by the Commission on Human Rights.
RESOLUTION 55/115
Adopted at the 81st plenary meeting, on 4 December 2000, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/55/602/Add.3, para. 49),The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Costa Rica, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Kuwait, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Monaco, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Poland, Portugal, San Marino, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of America. by a recorded vote of 102 to 3, with 60 abstentions, as follows:
In favour: Albania, Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bahamas, Barbados, Belgium, Belize, Bhutan, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Comoros, Costa Rica, Côte d'Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominica, Ecuador, El Salvador, Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Latvia, Lesotho, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malawi, Maldives, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia, Nauru, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Tajikistan, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Trinidad and Tobago, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu
Against: Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Mauritania, Sudan
Abstentions: Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belarus, Benin, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Chad, China, Congo, Cuba, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Egypt, Eritrea, Fiji, Gambia, Ghana, Guinea, India, Indonesia, Jordan, Kenya, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Madagascar, Malaysia, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Nigeria, Pakistan, Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Sri Lanka, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Togo, Tunisia, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Venezuela, Viet Nam
55/115. Human rights situation in Iraq
The General Assembly,
Guided by the Charter of the United Nations, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,Resolution 217 A (III). the International Covenants on Human RightsResolution 2200 A (XXI), annex. and other human rights instruments,
Reaffirming that all Member States have an obligation to promote and protect human rights and fundamental freedoms and to fulfil the obligations they have undertaken under the various international instruments in this field,
Mindful that Iraq is a party to the International Covenants on Human Rights, other international human rights instruments and the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949 for the protection of victims of war,United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, Nos. 970-973.
Recalling its previous resolutions and those of the Commission on Human Rights on the subject, and taking note of the most recent, Commission resolution 2000/17 of 18 April 2000,See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2000, Supplement No. 3 and corrigendum (E/2000/23 and Corr.1), chap II, sect. A.
Recalling also Security Council resolution 686 (1991) of 2 March 1991, in which the Council called upon Iraq to release all Kuwaitis and nationals of other States who might still be held in detention, Council resolution 687 (1991) of 3 April 1991, Council resolution 688 (1991) of 5 April 1991, in which the Council demanded an end to the repression of the Iraqi civilian population and insisted that Iraq cooperate with humanitarian organizations and that the human rights of all Iraqi citizens be respected, Council resolutions 986 (1995) of 14 April 1995, 1111 (1997) of 4 June 1997, 1129 (1997) of 12 September 1997, 1143 (1997) of 4 December 1997, 1153 (1998) of 20 February 1998, 1175 (1998) of 19 June 1998, 1210 (1998) of 24 November 1998, 1242 (1999) of 21 May 1999, 1266 (1999) of 4 October 1999, 1281 (1999) of 10 December 1999 and 1302 (2000) of 8 June 2000, in which the Council authorized States to permit imports of Iraqi oil in order to allow Iraq to purchase humanitarian supplies, and Council resolution 1284 (1999) of 17 December 1999, in which the Council, by means of a comprehensive approach to the situation in Iraq, inter alia, raised the ceiling for the allowable import of Iraqi oil in order to increase the amount of revenue available for the purchase of humanitarian supplies, laid down new provisions and procedures designed to improve the implementation of the humanitarian programme and to further achievements in meeting the humanitarian needs of the Iraqi population, and reiterated the obligation of Iraq to facilitate the repatriation of all Kuwaiti and third-country nationals referred to in paragraph 30 of Council resolution 687 (1991),
Taking note of the concluding observations of the Human Rights Committee,Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-third Session, Supplement No. 40 (A/53/40), vol. I, paras. 90-111. the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination,Ibid., Fifty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 18 (A/54/18), paras. 337-361. the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural RightsOfficial Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1998, Supplement No. 2 (E/1998/22), paras. 245-283. and the Committee on the Rights of the ChildOfficial Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-fifth Session, Supplement No. 41 (A/55/41), paras. 304-333. on the recent reports submitted to them by Iraq, in which these treaty-monitoring bodies point to a wide range of human rights problems and hold the view that the Government of Iraq remains bound by its treaty obligations, while pointing to the adverse effect of sanctions on the daily life of the population, in particular children,
Recalling the reports of the Secretary-General concerning the implementation of Security Council resolutions 986 (1995),S/1996/1015. 1111 (1997),S/1997/935. 1143 (1997),S/1998/90, S/1998/194 and Corr.1 and S/1998/477. 1175 (1998),S/1998/823 and S/1998/1100. 1210 (1998)S/1999/187 and S/1999/573 and Corr.2. and 1242 (1999),S/1999/896 and Corr.1 and S/1999/1162 and Corr.1. and taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of Security Council resolution 1302 (2000),S/2000/857.
Reaffirming that it is the responsibility of the Government of Iraq to ensure the well-being of its entire population and the full enjoyment of all human rights and fundamental freedoms, concerned about the dire humanitarian situation in Iraq, which particularly affects certain vulnerable groups, including children, as stated in the reports of several United Nations human rights treaty bodies, and appealing to all concerned to fulfil their mutual obligations in the management of the humanitarian programme established by the Security Council in its resolution 986 (1995),
1. Welcomes the report of the Special Rapporteur of the Commission on Human Rights on the situation of human rights in IraqSee A/55/294. and the observations, conclusions and recommendations contained therein;
2. Notes with dismay that there has been no improvement in the situation of human rights in the country;
3. Strongly condemns:
(a) The systematic, widespread and extremely grave violations of human rights and of international humanitarian law by the Government of Iraq, resulting in an all-pervasive repression and oppression sustained by broad-based discrimination and widespread terror;
(b) The suppression of freedom of thought, expression, information, association, assembly and movement through fear of arrest, imprisonment, execution, expulsion, house demolition and other sanctions;
(c) The repression faced by any kind of opposition, in particular the harassment and intimidation of and threats against Iraqi opponents living abroad and members of their families;
(d) The widespread use of the death penalty in disregard of the provisions of the International Covenant on Civil and Political RightsResolution 2200 A (XXI), annex. and the United Nations safeguards;
(e) Summary and arbitrary executions, including political killings and the continuing so-called clean-out of prisons, as well as enforced or involuntary disappearances, routinely practised arbitrary arrests and detention and consistent and routine failure to respect due process and the rule of law;
(f) Widespread, systematic torture and the maintaining of decrees prescribing cruel and inhuman punishment as a penalty for offences;
4. Calls upon the Government of Iraq:
(a) To abide by its freely undertaken obligations under international human rights treaties and international humanitarian law and to respect and ensure the rights of all individuals, irrespective of their origin, ethnicity, gender or religion, within its territory and subject to its jurisdiction;
(b) To bring the actions of its military and security forces into conformity with the standards of international law, in particular those of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights;
(c) To cooperate with United Nations human rights mechanisms, in particular by inviting the Special Rapporteur to visit the country and allowing the stationing of human rights monitors throughout Iraq pursuant to the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and the Commission on Human Rights;
(d) To establish the independence of the judiciary and abrogate all laws granting impunity to specified forces or persons killing or injuring individuals for any purpose beyond the administration of justice under the rule of law as prescribed by international standards;
(e) To abrogate all decrees that prescribe cruel and inhuman punishment or treatment, including mutilation, and to ensure that torture and cruel punishment and treatment no longer occur;
(f) To abrogate all laws and procedures, including Revolution Command Council Decree No. 840 of 4 November 1986, that penalize free expression, and to ensure that the genuine will of the people shall be the basis of the authority of the State;
(g) To ensure free exercise of political opposition and to prevent intimidation and repression of political opponents and their families;
(h) To respect the rights of all ethnic and religious groups and to cease immediately its repressive practices aimed at the Iraqi Kurds, Assyrians and Turkmen, in particular their deportation from the regions of Kirkuk and Khanaqin, and at the population of the southern marsh areas, where drainage projects have provoked environmental destruction and a deterioration of the situation of the civilian population, as well as to ensure the physical integrity of all citizens, including the Shi'a population, and to guarantee their freedoms;
(i) To cooperate with the Tripartite Commission and its Technical Subcommittee to establish the whereabouts and resolve the fate of the remaining several hundred missing persons, including prisoners of war, Kuwaiti nationals and third-country nationals, victims of the illegal Iraqi occupation of Kuwait, to cooperate with the Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances of the Commission on Human Rights for that purpose, to cooperate with the high-level coordinator of the Secretary-General for Kuwaitis and third-country nationals and Kuwaiti property, to pay compensation to the families of those who died or disappeared in the custody of the Iraqi authorities, through the mechanism established by the Security Council in resolution 692 (1991) of 20 May 1991, to release immediately all Kuwaitis and nationals of other States who may still be held in detention and inform families about the whereabouts of arrested persons, to provide information about death sentences imposed on prisoners of war and civilian detainees, and to issue death certificates for deceased prisoners of war and civilian detainees;
(j) To cooperate further with international aid agencies and non-governmental organizations in providing humanitarian assistance and monitoring in the northern and southern areas of the country;
(k) To continue to cooperate in the implementation of Security Council resolutions 986 (1995), 1111 (1997), 1143 (1997), 1153 (1998), 1210 (1998), 1242 (1999), 1266 (1999), 1281 (1999) and 1302 (2000), and to cooperate, together with all concerned, in the implementation of the sections on humanitarian questions of Council resolution 1284 (1999), to ensure fully the timely and equitable distribution, without discrimination, to the Iraqi population, including the population in remote areas, of all humanitarian supplies purchased under the oil-for-humanitarian-goods programme, to address effectively the needs of vulnerable groups, including children, pregnant women, the disabled, the elderly and the mentally ill, among others, to facilitate the work of United Nations humanitarian personnel in Iraq by ensuring the free and unobstructed movement of observers throughout the country, as well as their free access, without any discrimination, to all the population, and to ensure that involuntarily displaced persons receive humanitarian assistance without the need to demonstrate that they have resided for six months at their places of temporary residence;
(l) To cooperate in the identification of minefields existing throughout Iraq with a view to facilitating their marking and eventual clearing;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the Special Rapporteur with all necessary assistance in carrying out his mandate, and decides to continue the examination of the situation of human rights in Iraq at its fifty-sixth session, under the item entitled "Human rights questions", in the light of additional elements provided by the Commission on Human Rights.
RESOLUTION 55/116
Adopted at the 81st plenary meeting, on 4 December 2000, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/55/602/Add.3, para. 49),The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Andorra, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Monaco, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Romania, San Marino, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden and United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland. by a recorded vote of 85 to 32, with 49 abstentions, as follows:
In favour: Albania, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Bahamas, Barbados, Belgium, Belize, Bolivia, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Namibia, Nauru, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Tajikistan, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Trinidad and Tobago, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Yugoslavia, Zimbabwe
Against: Algeria, Bahrain, Chad, China, Comoros, Cuba, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Egypt, Gambia, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Jordan, Kuwait, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Mauritania, Morocco, Myanmar, Oman, Pakistan, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic, Togo, Tunisia, United Arab Emirates, Viet Nam
Abstentions: Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Belarus, Benin, Bhutan, Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Congo, Côte d'Ivoire, Ethiopia, Fiji, Georgia, Ghana, Guinea, Honduras, Jamaica, Kenya, Lesotho, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of), Mozambique, Nepal, Nigeria, Palau, Philippines, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Sri Lanka, Suriname, Swaziland, Thailand, Uganda, Ukraine, United Republic of Tanzania, United States of America
55/116. Situation of human rights in the Sudan
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming that all Member States have an obligation to promote and protect human rights and fundamental freedoms as stated in the Charter of the United Nations, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,Resolution 217 A (III). the International Covenants on Human RightsResolution 2200 A (XXI), annex. and other applicable human rights instruments and to fulfil the obligations that they have undertaken under the various international instruments in this field,
Mindful that the Sudan is a party to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex. the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights,Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex. the Convention on the Rights of the Child,Resolution 44/25, annex. the African Charter on Human and Peoples' RightsUnited Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1520, No. 26363. and the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949,Ibid., vol. 75, Nos. 970-973.
Recalling its previous resolutions on the situation of human rights in the Sudan, and taking note of Commission on Human Rights resolution 2000/27 of 18 April 2000,See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2000, Supplement No. 3 and corrigendum (E/2000/23 and Corr.1), chap. II, sect. A.
Aware of the urgent need for the Government of the Sudan to implement effective additional measures in the field of human rights and humanitarian relief in order to protect the civilian population from the effects of armed conflicts,
Expressing its firm belief that progress towards a peaceful settlement of the conflict in southern Sudan within the peace initiative of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development will contribute greatly to the creation of a better environment to encourage respect for human rights in the Sudan,
Condemning the murder of four Sudanese relief workers in April 1999 while in the custody of the Sudan People's Liberation Army/Movement,
1. Welcomes:
(a) The interim report of the Special Rapporteur of the Commission on Human Rights on the situation of human rights in the Sudan;See A/55/374.
(b) The visit by the Special Rapporteur to the Sudan in February and March 2000 at the invitation of the Government of the Sudan and the very good cooperation extended by the Government in this regard, as well as the stated willingness of the Government to continue to cooperate with the Special Rapporteur;
(c) The signing of the agreement of 29 March 2000 between the Government of the Sudan and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights;
(d) The activities of the Committee for the Eradication of Abduction of Women and Children as a constructive response on the part of the Government of the Sudan, the cooperation extended to the Committee by the local communities and the support of the international community and non-governmental organizations;
