Thank you so much, Chris. 
And it's truly a great honor to have the opportunity to come to this stage twice; I'm extremely grateful. 
I have been blown away by this conference, and I want to thank all of you for the many nice comments about what I had to say the other night. 
And I say that sincerely, partly because (Mock sob) I need that. 
(Laughter) Put yourselves in my position. 
(Laughter) I flew on Air Force Two for eight years. 
(Laughter) Now I have to take off my shoes or boots to get on an airplane! 
(Laughter) (Applause) I'll tell you one quick story to illustrate what that's been like for me. 
(Laughter) It's a true story -- every bit of this is true. 
Soon after Tipper and I left the -- (Mock sob) White House -- (Laughter) we were driving from our home in Nashville to a little farm we have 50 miles east of Nashville. 
Driving ourselves. 
(Laughter) I know it sounds like a little thing to you, but -- (Laughter) I looked in the rear-view mirror and all of a sudden it just hit me. 
There was no motorcade back there. 
(Laughter) You've heard of phantom limb pain? 
(Laughter) This was a rented Ford Taurus. 
(Laughter) It was dinnertime, and we started looking for a place to eat. 
We were on I-40. 
We got off the exit, we found a Shoney's restaurant. 
Low-cost family restaurant chain, for those of you who don't know it. 
We went in and sat down at the booth, and the waitress came over, made a big commotion over Tipper. 
(Laughter) She took our order, and then went to the couple in the booth next to us, and she lowered her voice so much, I had to really strain to hear what she was saying. 
And she said "Yes, that's former Vice President Al Gore and his wife, Tipper." 
And the man said, "He's come down a long way, hasn't he?" 
(Laughter) (Applause) There's been kind of a series of epiphanies. 
(Laughter) The very next day, continuing the totally true story, I got on a G-V to fly to Africa to make a speech in Nigeria, in the city of Lagos, on the topic of energy. 
And I began the speech by telling them the story of what had just happened the day before in Nashville. 
And I told it pretty much the same way I've just shared it with you: Tipper and I were driving ourselves, Shoney's, low-cost family restaurant chain, what the man said -- they laughed. 
I gave my speech, then went back out to the airport to fly back home. 
I fell asleep on the plane until, during the middle of the night, we landed on the Azores Islands for refueling. 
I woke up, they opened the door, I went out to get some fresh air, and I looked, and there was a man running across the runway. 
And he was waving a piece of paper, and he was yelling, "Call Washington! Call Washington!" 
And I thought to myself, in the middle of the night, in the middle of the Atlantic, what in the world could be wrong in Washington? 
Then I remembered it could be a bunch of things. 
(Laughter) But what it turned out to be, was that my staff was extremely upset because one of the wire services in Nigeria had already written a story about my speech, and it had already been printed in cities all across the United States of America. 
It was printed in Monterey, I checked. 
(Laughter) And the story began, "Former Vice President Al Gore announced in Nigeria yesterday," quote: 'My wife Tipper and I have opened a low-cost family restaurant'" -- (Laughter) "'named Shoney's, and we are running it ourselves.'" (Laughter) Before I could get back to U.S. soil, David Letterman and Jay Leno had already started in on -- one of them had me in a big white chef's hat, Tipper was saying, "One more burger with fries!" 
(Laughter) Three days later, I got a nice, long, handwritten letter from my friend and partner and colleague Bill Clinton, saying, "Congratulations on the new restaurant, Al!" 
(Laughter) We like to celebrate each other's successes in life. 
(Laughter) I was going to talk about information ecology. 
But I was thinking that, since I plan to make a lifelong habit of coming back to TED, that maybe I could talk about that another time. 
(Applause) Chris Anderson: It's a deal! 
(Applause) Al Gore: I want to focus on what many of you have said you would like me to elaborate on: What can you do about the climate crisis? 
I want to start with a couple of -- I'm going to show some new images, and I'm going to recapitulate just four or five. 
Now, the slide show. 
I add new images, because I learn more about it every time I give it. 
It's like beach-combing, you know? 
Every time the tide comes in and out, you find some more shells. 
Just in the last two days, we got the new temperature records in January. 
This is just for the United States of America. 
Historical average for Januarys is 31 degrees; last month was 39.5 degrees. 
Now, I know that you wanted some more bad news about the environment -- I'm kidding. 
But these are the recapitulation slides, and then I'm going to go into new material about what you can do. 
But I wanted to elaborate on a couple of these. 
First of all, this is where we're projected to go with the U.S. contribution to global warming, under business as usual. 
Efficiency in end-use electricity and end-use of all energy is the low-hanging fruit. 
Efficiency and conservation -- it's not a cost; it's a profit. 
It's not negative; it's positive. 
But they are also very effective in deflecting our path. 
Cars and trucks -- I talked about that in the slideshow, but I want you to put it in perspective. 
It's an easy, visible target of concern -- and it should be -- but there is more global warming pollution that comes from buildings than from cars and trucks. 
Cars and trucks are very significant, and we have the lowest standards in the world. 
And so we should address that. But it's part of the puzzle. 
Other transportation efficiency is as important as cars and trucks. 
Renewables at the current levels of technological efficiency can make this much difference. 
And with what Vinod, and John Doerr and others, many of you here -- there are a lot of people directly involved in this -- this wedge is going to grow much more rapidly than the current projection shows it. 
Carbon Capture and Sequestration -- that's what CCS stands for -- is likely to become the killer app that will enable us to continue to use fossil fuels in a way that is safe. 
Not quite there yet. 
OK. Now, what can you do? 
Most of these expenditures are also profitable. 
Insulation, better design. 
I mentioned automobiles -- buy a hybrid. 
Figure out some of the other options that are much better. 
Be a green consumer. 
You have choices with everything you buy, between things that have a harsh effect, or a much less harsh effect on the global climate crisis. 
Consider this: Make a decision to live a carbon-neutral life. 
Those of you who are good at branding, I'd love to get your advice and help on how to say this in a way that connects with the most people. 
It is easier than you think. 
A lot of us in here have made that decision, and it is really pretty easy. 
It means reduce your carbon dioxide emissions with the full range of choices that you make, and then purchase or acquire offsets for the remainder that you have not completely reduced. 
There is a carbon calculator. 
Participant Productions convened -- with my active involvement -- the leading software writers in the world, on this arcane science of carbon calculation, to construct a consumer-friendly carbon calculator. 
You can very precisely calculate what your CO2 emissions are, and then you will be given options to reduce. 
And by the time the movie comes out in May, this will be updated to 2.0, and we will have click-through purchases of offsets. 
Next, consider making your business carbon-neutral. 
Again, some of us have done that, and it's not as hard as you think. 
Integrate climate solutions into all of your innovations, whether you are from the technology, or entertainment, or design and architecture community. 
Invest sustainably. 
Listen, if you have invested money with managers who you compensate on the basis of their annual performance, don't ever again complain about quarterly report CEO management. 
Over time, people do what you pay them to do. 
And if they judge how much they're going to get paid on your capital that they've invested, based on the short-term returns, you're going to get short-term decisions. 
A lot more to be said about that. 
Become a catalyst of change. 
The movie is a movie version of the slideshow I gave two nights ago, except it's a lot more entertaining. 
Many of you here have the opportunity to ensure that a lot of people see it. 
Consider sending somebody to Nashville. 
And I am personally going to train people to give this slideshow -- re-purposed, with some of the personal stories obviously replaced with a generic approach, and it's not just the slides, it's what they mean. 
And so I'm going to be conducting a course this summer for a group of people that are nominated by different folks to come and then give it en masse, in communities all across the country, and we're going to update the slideshow for all of them every single week, to keep it right on the cutting edge. 
Working with Larry Lessig, it will be, somewhere in that process, posted with tools and limited-use copyrights, so that young people can remix it and do it in their own way. 
(Applause) Where did anybody get the idea that you ought to stay arm's length from politics? 
We need Republicans as well. 
This used to be a bipartisan issue, and I know that in this group it really is. 
Make our democracy work the way it's supposed to work. 
Support the idea of capping carbon dioxide emissions -- global warming pollution -- and trading it. 
Here's why: as long as the United States is out of the world system, it's not a closed system. 
Once it becomes a closed system, with U.S. participation, then everybody who's on a board of directors -- how many people here serve on the board of directors of a corporation? 
Once it's a closed system, you will have legal liability if you do not urge your CEO to get the maximum income from reducing and trading the carbon emissions that can be avoided. 
Help with the mass persuasion campaign that will start this spring. 
We have to change the minds of the American people. 
Because presently, the politicians do not have permission to do what needs to be done. 
And in our modern country, the role of logic and reason no longer includes mediating between wealth and power the way it once did. 
It's now repetition of short, hot-button, 30-second, 28-second television ads. 
We have to buy a lot of those ads. 
Let's re-brand global warming, as many of you have suggested. 
I like "climate crisis" instead of "climate collapse," but again, those of you who are good at branding, I need your help on this. 
Somebody said the test we're facing now, a scientist told me, is whether the combination of an opposable thumb and a neocortex is a viable combination. 
(Laughter) That's really true. 
Again, the Republicans here -- this shouldn't be partisan. 
You have more influence than some of us who are Democrats do. 
This is an opportunity. 
Not just this, but connected to the ideas that are here, to bring more coherence to them. 
We are one. 
Thank you very much, I appreciate it. 
(Applause) 

With all the legitimate concerns about AIDS and avian flu -- and we'll hear about that from the brilliant Dr. Brilliant later today -- I want to talk about the other pandemic, which is cardiovascular disease, diabetes, hypertension -- all of which are completely preventable for at least 95 percent of people just by changing diet and lifestyle. 
And what's happening is that there's a globalization of illness occurring, that people are starting to eat like us, and live like us, and die like us. And in one generation, for example, Asia's gone from having one of the lowest rates of heart disease and obesity and diabetes to one of the highest. And in Africa, cardiovascular disease equals the HIV and AIDS deaths in most countries. 
So there's a critical window of opportunity we have to make an important difference that can affect the lives of literally millions of people, and practice preventive medicine on a global scale. 
Heart and blood vessel diseases still kill more people -- not only in this country, but also worldwide -- than everything else combined, and yet it's completely preventable for almost everybody. 
It's not only preventable; it's actually reversible. And for the last almost 29 years, we've been able to show that by simply changing diet and lifestyle, using these very high-tech, expensive, state-of-the-art measures to prove how powerful these very simple and low-tech and low-cost interventions can be like -- quantitative arteriography, before and after a year, and cardiac PET scans. 
We showed a few months ago -- we published the first study showing you can actually stop or reverse the progression of prostate cancer by making changes in diet and lifestyle, and 70 percent regression in the tumor growth, or inhibition of the tumor growth, compared to only nine percent in the control group. 
And in the MRI and MR spectroscopy here, the prostate tumor activity is shown in red -- you can see it diminishing after a year. 
Now there is an epidemic of obesity: two-thirds of adults and 15 percent of kids. What's really concerning to me is that diabetes has increased 70 percent in the past 10 years, and this may be the first generation in which our kids live a shorter life span than we do. That's pitiful, and it's preventable. 
Now these are not election returns, these are the people -- the number of the people who are obese by state, beginning in '85, '86, '87 -- these are from the CDC website -- '88, '89, '90, '91 -- you get a new category -- '92, '93, '94, '95, '96, '97, '98, '99, 2000, 2001 -- it gets worse. We're kind of devolving. (Laughter) Now what can we do about this? Well, you know, the diet that we've found that can reverse heart disease and cancer is an Asian diet. 
But the people in Asia are starting to eat like we are, which is why they're starting to get sick like we are. 
So I've been working with a lot of the big food companies. They can make it fun and sexy and hip and crunchy and convenient to eat healthier foods, like -- I chair the advisory boards to McDonald's, and PepsiCo, and ConAgra, and Safeway, and soon Del Monte, and they're finding that it's good business. 
The salads that you see at McDonald's came from the work -- they're going to have an Asian salad. At Pepsi, two-thirds of their revenue growth came from their better foods. 
And so if we can do that, then we can free up resources for buying drugs that you really do need for treating AIDS and HIV and malaria and for preventing avian flu. Thank you. 

I have a doppelganger. 
(Laughter) Dr. Gero is a brilliant but slightly mad scientist in the "Dragonball Z: Android Saga." 
If you look very carefully, you see that his skull has been replaced with a transparent Plexiglas dome so that the workings of his brain can be observed and also controlled with light. 
That's exactly what I do -- optical mind control. 
(Laughter) But in contrast to my evil twin who lusts after world domination, my motives are not sinister. 
I control the brain in order to understand how it works. 
Now wait a minute, you may say, how can you go straight to controlling the brain without understanding it first? 
Isn't that putting the cart before the horse? 
Many neuroscientists agree with this view and think that understanding will come from more detailed observation and analysis. 
They say, "If we could record the activity of our neurons, we would understand the brain." 
But think for a moment what that means. 
Even if we could measure what every cell is doing at all times, we would still have to make sense of the recorded activity patterns, and that's so difficult, chances are we'll understand these patterns just as little as the brains that produce them. 
Take a look at what brain activity might look like. 
In this simulation, each black dot is one nerve cell. 
The dot is visible whenever a cell fires an electrical impulse. 
There's 10,000 neurons here. 
So you're looking at roughly one percent of the brain of a cockroach. 
Your brains are about 100 million times more complicated. 
Somewhere, in a pattern like this, is you, your perceptions, your emotions, your memories, your plans for the future. 
But we don't know where, since we don't know how to read the pattern. 
We don't understand the code used by the brain. 
To make progress, we need to break the code. 
But how? 
An experienced code-breaker will tell you that in order to figure out what the symbols in a code mean, it's essential to be able to play with them, to rearrange them at will. 
So in this situation too, to decode the information contained in patterns like this, watching alone won't do. 
We need to rearrange the pattern. 
In other words, instead of recording the activity of neurons, we need to control it. 
It's not essential that we can control the activity of all neurons in the brain, just some. 
The more targeted our interventions, the better. 
And I'll show you in a moment how we can achieve the necessary precision. 
And since I'm realistic, rather than grandiose, I don't claim that the ability to control the function of the nervous system will at once unravel all its mysteries. 
But we'll certainly learn a lot. 
Now, I'm by no means the first person to realize how powerful a tool intervention is. 
The history of attempts to tinker with the function of the nervous system is long and illustrious. 
It dates back at least 200 years, to Galvani's famous experiments in the late 18th century and beyond. 
Galvani showed that a frog's legs twitched when he connected the lumbar nerve to a source of electrical current. 
This experiment revealed the first, and perhaps most fundamental, nugget of the neural code: that information is written in the form of electrical impulses. 
Galvani's approach of probing the nervous system with electrodes has remained state-of-the-art until today, despite a number of drawbacks. 
Sticking wires into the brain is obviously rather crude. 
It's hard to do in animals that run around, and there is a physical limit to the number of wires that can be inserted simultaneously. 
So around the turn of the last century, I started to think, "Wouldn't it be wonderful if one could take this logic and turn it upside down?" 
So instead of inserting a wire into one spot of the brain, re-engineer the brain itself so that some of its neural elements become responsive to diffusely broadcast signals such as a flash of light. 
Such an approach would literally, in a flash of light, overcome many of the obstacles to discovery. 
First, it's clearly a non-invasive, wireless form of communication. 
And second, just as in a radio broadcast, you can communicate with many receivers at once. 
You don't need to know where these receivers are, and it doesn't matter if these receivers move -- just think of the stereo in your car. 
It gets even better, for it turns out that we can fabricate the receivers out of materials that are encoded in DNA. 
So each nerve cell with the right genetic makeup will spontaneously produce a receiver that allows us to control its function. 
I hope you'll appreciate the beautiful simplicity of this concept. 
There's no high-tech gizmos here, just biology revealed through biology. 
Now let's take a look at these miraculous receivers up close. 
As we zoom in on one of these purple neurons, we see that its outer membrane is studded with microscopic pores. 
Pores like these conduct electrical current and are responsible for all the communication in the nervous system. 
But these pores here are special. 
They are coupled to light receptors similar to the ones in your eyes. 
Whenever a flash of light hits the receptor, the pore opens, an electrical current is switched on, and the neuron fires electrical impulses. 
Because the light-activated pore is encoded in DNA, we can achieve incredible precision. 
This is because, although each cell in our bodies contains the same set of genes, different mixes of genes get turned on and off in different cells. 
You can exploit this to make sure that only some neurons contain our light-activated pore and others don't. 
So in this cartoon, the bluish white cell in the upper-left corner does not respond to light because it lacks the light-activated pore. 
The approach works so well that we can write purely artificial messages directly to the brain. 
In this example, each electrical impulse, each deflection on the trace, is caused by a brief pulse of light. 
And the approach, of course, also works in moving, behaving animals. 
This is the first ever such experiment, sort of the optical equivalent of Galvani's. 
It was done six or seven years ago by my then graduate student, Susana Lima. 
Susana had engineered the fruit fly on the left so that just two out of the 200,000 cells in its brain expressed the light-activated pore. 
You're familiar with these cells because they are the ones that frustrate you when you try to swat the fly. 
They trained the escape reflex that makes the fly jump into the air and fly away whenever you move your hand in position. 
And you can see here that the flash of light has exactly the same effect. 
The animal jumps, it spreads its wings, it vibrates them, but it can't actually take off because the fly is sandwiched between two glass plates. 
Now to make sure that this was no reaction of the fly to a flash it could see, Susana did a simple but brutally effective experiment. 
She cut the heads off of her flies. 
These headless bodies can live for about a day, but they don't do much. 
They just stand around and groom excessively. 
So it seems that the only trait that survives decapitation is vanity. 
(Laughter) Anyway, as you'll see in a moment, Susana was able to turn on the flight motor of what's the equivalent of the spinal cord of these flies and get some of the headless bodies to actually take off and fly away. 
They didn't get very far, obviously. 
Since we took these first steps, the field of optogenetics has exploded. 
And there are now hundreds of labs using these approaches. 
And we've come a long way since Galvani's and Susana's first successes in making animals twitch or jump. 
We can now actually interfere with their psychology in rather profound ways, as I'll show you in my last example, which is directed at a familiar question. 
Life is a string of choices creating a constant pressure to decide what to do next. 
We cope with this pressure by having brains, and within our brains, decision-making centers that I've called here the "Actor." 
The Actor implements a policy that takes into account the state of the environment and the context in which we operate. 
Our actions change the environment, or context, and these changes are then fed back into the decision loop. 
Now to put some neurobiological meat on this abstract model, we constructed a simple one-dimensional world for our favorite subject, fruit flies. 
Each chamber in these two vertical stacks contains one fly. 
The left and the right halves of the chamber are filled with two different odors, and a security camera watches as the flies pace up and down between them. 
Here's some such CCTV footage. 
Whenever a fly reaches the midpoint of the chamber where the two odor streams meet, it has to make a decision. 
It has to decide whether to turn around and stay in the same odor, or whether to cross the midline and try something new. 
These decisions are clearly a reflection of the Actor's policy. 
Now for an intelligent being like our fly, this policy is not written in stone but rather changes as the animal learns from experience. 
We can incorporate such an element of adaptive intelligence into our model by assuming that the fly's brain contains not only an Actor, but a different group of cells, a "Critic," that provides a running commentary on the Actor's choices. 
You can think of this nagging inner voice as sort of the brain's equivalent of the Catholic Church, if you're an Austrian like me, or the super-ego, if you're Freudian, or your mother, if you're Jewish. 
(Laughter) Now obviously, the Critic is a key ingredient in what makes us intelligent. 
So we set out to identify the cells in the fly's brain that played the role of the Critic. 
And the logic of our experiment was simple. 
We thought if we could use our optical remote control to activate the cells of the Critic, we should be able, artificially, to nag the Actor into changing its policy. 
In other words, the fly should learn from mistakes that it thought it had made but, in reality, it had not made. 
So we bred flies whose brains were more or less randomly peppered with cells that were light addressable. 
And then we took these flies and allowed them to make choices. 
And whenever they made one of the two choices, chose one odor, in this case the blue one over the orange one, we switched on the lights. 
If the Critic was among the optically activated cells, the result of this intervention should be a change in policy. 
The fly should learn to avoid the optically reinforced odor. 
Here's what happened in two instances: We're comparing two strains of flies, each of them having about 100 light-addressable cells in their brains, shown here in green on the left and on the right. 
What's common among these groups of cells is that they all produce the neurotransmitter dopamine. 
But the identities of the individual dopamine-producing neurons are clearly largely different on the left and on the right. 
Optically activating these hundred or so cells into two strains of flies has dramatically different consequences. 
If you look first at the behavior of the fly on the right, you can see that whenever it reaches the midpoint of the chamber where the two odors meet, it marches straight through, as it did before. 
Its behavior is completely unchanged. 
But the behavior of the fly on the left is very different. 
Whenever it comes up to the midpoint, it pauses, it carefully scans the odor interface as if it was sniffing out its environment, and then it turns around. 
This means that the policy that the Actor implements now includes an instruction to avoid the odor that's in the right half of the chamber. 
This means that the Critic must have spoken in that animal, and that the Critic must be contained among the dopamine-producing neurons on the left, but not among the dopamine producing neurons on the right. 
Through many such experiments, we were able to narrow down the identity of the Critic to just 12 cells. 
These 12 cells, as shown here in green, send the output to a brain structure called the "mushroom body," which is shown here in gray. 
We know from our formal model that the brain structure at the receiving end of the Critic's commentary is the Actor. 
So this anatomy suggests that the mushroom bodies have something to do with action choice. 
Based on everything we know about the mushroom bodies, this makes perfect sense. 
In fact, it makes so much sense that we can construct an electronic toy circuit that simulates the behavior of the fly. 
In this electronic toy circuit, the mushroom body neurons are symbolized by the vertical bank of blue LEDs in the center of the board. 
These LED's are wired to sensors that detect the presence of odorous molecules in the air. 
Each odor activates a different combination of sensors, which in turn activates a different odor detector in the mushroom body. 
So the pilot in the cockpit of the fly, the Actor, can tell which odor is present simply by looking at which of the blue LEDs lights up. 
What the Actor does with this information depends on its policy, which is stored in the strengths of the connection, between the odor detectors and the motors that power the fly's evasive actions. 
If the connection is weak, the motors will stay off and the fly will continue straight on its course. 
If the connection is strong, the motors will turn on and the fly will initiate a turn. 
Now consider a situation in which the motors stay off, the fly continues on its path and it suffers some painful consequence such as getting zapped. 
In a situation like this, we would expect the Critic to speak up and to tell the Actor to change its policy. 
We have created such a situation, artificially, by turning on the critic with a flash of light. 
That caused a strengthening of the connections between the currently active odor detector and the motors. 
So the next time the fly finds itself facing the same odor again, the connection is strong enough to turn on the motors and to trigger an evasive maneuver. 
I don't know about you, but I find it exhilarating to see how vague psychological notions evaporate and give rise to a physical, mechanistic understanding of the mind, even if it's the mind of the fly. 
This is one piece of good news. 
The other piece of good news, for a scientist at least, is that much remains to be discovered. 
In the experiments I told you about, we have lifted the identity of the Critic, but we still have no idea how the Critic does its job. 
Come to think of it, knowing when you're wrong without a teacher, or your mother, telling you, is a very hard problem. 
There are some ideas in computer science and in artificial intelligence as to how this might be done, but we still haven't solved a single example of how intelligent behavior springs from the physical interactions in living matter. 
I think we'll get there in the not too distant future. 
Thank you. 
(Applause) 

Well, there's lots to talk about, but I think I'm just going to play to start off. 
(Music) ♫ When I wake up ♫ ♫ in the morning ♫ ♫ I pour the coffee ♫ ♫ I read the paper ♫ ♫ And then I slowly ♫ ♫ and so softly ♫ ♫ do the dishes ♫ ♫ So feed the fishes ♫ ♫ You sing me happy birthday ♫ ♫ Like it's gonna be ♫ ♫ your last day ♫ ♫ here on Earth ♫ (Applause) All right. 
So, I wanted to do something special today. 
I want to debut a new song that I've been working on in the last five or six months. 
And there's few things more thrilling than playing a song for the first time in front of an audience, especially when it's half-finished. 
(Laughter) I'm kind of hoping some conversations here might help me finish it. 
Because it gets into all sorts of crazy realms. 
And so this is basically a song about loops, but not the kind of loops that I make up here. 
They're feedback loops. 
And in the audio world that's when the microphone gets too close to its sound source, and then it gets in this self-destructive loop that creates a very unpleasant sound. 
And I'm going to demonstrate for you. 
(Laughter) I'm not going to hurt you. Don't worry. 
♫ This is a loop, feedback loop ♫ ♫ This is a loop, feedback loop ♫ ♫ This is a loop, feedback loop ♫ ♫ This is a loop, feedback loop ♫ ♫ This is a loop, feedback loop ♫ ♫ This is a loop, feedback loop ♫ ♫ This is a -- (Feedback) All right. I don't know if that was necessary to demonstrate -- (Laughter) -- but my point is it's the sound of self-destruction. 
And I've been thinking about how that applies across a whole spectrum of realms, from, say, the ecological, okay. 
There seems to be a rule in nature that if you get too close to where you came from, it gets ugly. 
So like, you can't feed cows their own brains or you get mad cow disease, and inbreeding and incest and, let's see, what's the other one? 
Biological -- there's autoimmune diseases, where the body attacks itself a little too overzealously and destroys the host, or the person. 
And then -- okay, this is where we get to the song -- kind of bridges the gap to the emotional. 
Because although I've used scientific terms in songs, it's very difficult sometimes to make them lyrical. 
And there's some things you just don't need to have in songs. 
So I'm trying to bridge this gap between this idea and this melody. 
And so, I don't know if you've ever had this, but when I close my eyes sometimes and try to sleep, I can't stop thinking about my own eyes. 
And it's like your eyes start straining to see themselves. 
That's what it feels like to me. 
It's not pleasant. 
I'm sorry if I put that idea in your head. 
(Laughter) It's impossible, of course, for your eyes to see themselves, but they seem to be trying. 
So that's getting a little more closer to a personal experience. 
Or ears being able to hear themselves -- it's just impossible. 
That's the thing. 
So, I've been working on this song that mentions these things and then also imagines a person who's been so successful at defending themselves from heartbreak that they're left to do the deed themselves, if that's possible. 
And that's what the song is asking. 
All right. 
It doesn't have a name yet. 
(Music) ♫ Go ahead and congratulate yourself ♫ ♫ Give yourself a hand, the hand is your hand ♫ ♫ And the eye that eyes itself is your eye ♫ ♫ And the ear that hears itself is near ♫ ♫ 'Cause it's your ear, oh oh ♫ ♫ You've done the impossible now ♫ ♫ Took yourself apart ♫ ♫ You made yourself invulnerable ♫ ♫ No one can break your heart ♫ ♫ So you wear it out ♫ ♫ And you wring it out ♫ ♫ And you wear it out ♫ ♫ And you break it yourself ♫ ♫ Breaking your own, break it yourself ♫ ♫ Breaking your own, break it yourself ♫ ♫ Breaking your own ♫ (Applause) Thanks. 
(Applause) All right. 
It's kind of cool. Songwriters can sort of get away with murder. 
You can throw out crazy theories and not have to back it up with data or graphs or research. 
But, you know, I think reckless curiosity would be what the world needs now, just a little bit. 
(Applause) I'm going to finish up with a song of mine called "Weather Systems." 
(Music) ♫ Quiet ♫ ♫ Quiet down, she said ♫ ♫ Speak into the back of his head ♫ ♫ On the edge of the bed, I can see your blood flow ♫ ♫ I can see your ♫ ♫ cells grow ♫ ♫ Hold still awhile ♫ ♫ Don't spill the wine ♫ ♫ I can see it all from here ♫ ♫ I can see ♫ ♫ oh, I ♫ ♫ I can see ♫ ♫ weather systems ♫ ♫ of the world ♫ ♫ Weather systems ♫ ♫ of the world ♫ ♫ Some things you say ♫ ♫ are not for sale ♫ ♫ I would hold it where ♫ ♫ our free agents of some substance are ♫ ♫ scared ♫ ♫ Hold still a while ♫ ♫ Don't spill the wine ♫ ♫ I can see it all from here ♫ ♫ I can see ♫ ♫ oh, I ♫ ♫ I can see ♫ ♫ weather systems of the world ♫ ♫ Weather systems ♫ ♫ of the world ♫ Thanks. 
(Applause) 

So this is a story of a place that I now call home. 
It's a story of public education and of rural communities and of what design might do to improve both. 
So this is Bertie County, North Carolina, USA. 
To give you an idea of the "where:" So here's North Carolina, and if we zoom in, Bertie County is in the eastern part of the state. 
It's about two hours east driving-time from Raleigh. 
And it's very flat. It's very swampy. 
It's mostly farmland. 
The entire county is home to just 20,000 people, and they're very sparsely distributed. 
So there's only 27 people per square mile, which comes down to about 10 people per square kilometer. 
Bertie County is kind of a prime example in the demise of rural America. 
We've seen this story all over the country and even in places beyond the American borders. 
We know the symptoms. 
It's the hollowing out of small towns. 
It's downtowns becoming ghost towns. 
The brain drain -- where all of the most educated and qualified leave and never come back. 
It's the dependence on farm subsidies and under-performing schools and higher poverty rates in rural areas than in urban. 
And Bertie County is no exception to this. 
Perhaps the biggest thing it struggles with, like many communities similar to it, is that there's no shared, collective investment in the future of rural communities. 
Only 6.8 percent of all our philanthropic giving in the U.S. right now benefits rural communities, and yet 20 percent of our population lives there. 
So Bertie County is not only very rural; it's incredibly poor. 
It is the poorest county in the state. 
It has one in three of its children living in poverty, and it's what is referred to as a "rural ghetto." 
The economy is mostly agricultural. 
The biggest crops are cotton and tobacco, and we're very proud of our Bertie County peanut. 
The biggest employer is the Purdue chicken processing plant. 
The county seat is Windsor. 
This is like Times Square of Windsor that you're looking at right now. 
It's home to only 2,000 people, and like a lot of other small towns it has been hollowed out over the years. 
There are more buildings that are empty or in disrepair than occupied and in use. 
You can count the number of restaurants in the county on one hand -- Bunn's Barbecue being my absolute favorite. 
But in the whole county there is no coffee shop, there's no Internet cafe, there's no movie theater, there's no bookstore. 
There isn't even a Walmart. 
Racially, the county is about 60 percent African-American, but what happens in the public schools is most of the privileged white kids go to the private Lawrence Academy. 
So the public school students are about 86 percent African-American. 
And this is a spread from the local newspaper of the recent graduating class, and you can see the difference is pretty stark. 
So to say that the public education system in Bertie County is struggling would be a huge understatement. 
There's basically no pool of qualified teachers to pull from, and only eight percent of the people in the county have a bachelor's degree or higher. 
So there isn't a big legacy in the pride of education. 
In fact, two years ago, only 27 percent of all the third- through eighth-graders were passing the state standard in both English and math. 
So it sounds like I'm painting a really bleak picture of this place, but I promise there is good news. 
The biggest asset, in my opinion, one of the biggest assets in Bertie County right now is this man: This is Dr. Chip Zullinger, fondly known as Dr. Z. 
He was brought in in October 2007 as the new superintendent to basically fix this broken school system. 
And he previously was a superintendent in Charleston, South Carolina and then in Denver, Colorado. 
He started some of the country's first charter schools in the late '80s in the U.S. 
And he is an absolute renegade and a visionary, and he is the reason that I now live and work there. 
So in February of 2009, Dr. Zullinger invited us, Project H Design -- which is a non-profit design firm that I founded -- to come to Bertie and to partner with him on the repair of this school district and to bring a design perspective to the repair of the school district. 
And he invited us in particular because we have a very specific type of design process -- one that results in appropriate design solutions in places that don't usually have access to design services or creative capital. 
Specifically, we use these six design directives, probably the most important being number two: we design with, not for -- in that, when we're doing humanitarian-focused design, it's not about designing for clients anymore. 
It's about designing with people, and letting appropriate solutions emerge from within. 
So at the time of being invited down there, we were based in San Francisco, and so we were going back and forth for basically the rest of 2009, spending about half our time in Bertie County. 
And when I say we, I mean Project H, but more specifically, I mean myself and my partner, Matthew Miller, who's an architect and a sort of MacGyver-type builder. 
So fast-forward to today, and we now live there. 
I have strategically cut Matt's head out of this photo, because he would kill me if he knew I was using it because of the sweatsuits. 
But this is our front porch. We live there. 
We now call this place home. 
Over the course of this year that we spent flying back and forth, we realized we had fallen in love with the place. 
We had fallen in love with the place and the people and the work that we're able to do in a rural place like Bertie County, that, as designers and builders, you can't do everywhere. 
There's space to experiment and to weld and to test things. 
We have an amazing advocate in Dr. Zullinger. 
There's a nobility of real, hands-on, dirt-under-your-fingernails work. 
But beyond our personal reasons for wanting to be there, there is a huge need. 
There is a total vacuum of creative capital in Bertie County. 
There isn't a single licensed architect in the whole county. 
And so we saw an opportunity to bring design as this untouched tool, something that Bertie County didn't otherwise have, and to be sort of the -- to usher that in as a new type of tool in their tool kit. 
The initial goal became using design within the public education system in partnership with Dr. Zullinger -- that was why we were there. 
But beyond that, we recognized that Bertie County, as a community, was in dire need of a fresh perspective of pride and connectedness and of the creative capital that they were so much lacking. 
So the goal became, yes, to apply design within education, but then to figure out how to make education a great vehicle for community development. 
So in order to do this, we've taken three different approaches to the intersection of design and education. 
And I should say that these are three things that we've done in Bertie County, but I feel pretty confident that they could work in a lot of other rural communities around the U.S. and maybe even beyond. 
So the first of the three is design for education. 
This is the most kind of direct, obvious intersection of the two things. 
It's the physical construction of improved spaces and materials and experiences for teachers and students. 
This is in response to the awful mobile trailers and the outdated textbooks and the terrible materials that we're building schools out of these days. 
And so this played out for us in a couple different ways. 
The first was a series of renovations of computer labs. 
So traditionally, the computer labs, particularly in an under-performing school like Bertie County, where they have to benchmark test every other week, the computer lab is a kill-and-drill testing facility. 
You come in, you face the wall, you take your test and you leave. 
So we wanted to change the way that students approach technology, to create a more convivial and social space that was more engaging, more accessible, and also to increase the ability for teachers to use these spaces for technology-based instruction. 
So this is the lab at the high school, and the principal there is in love with this room. 
Every time he has visitors, it's the first place that he takes them. 
And this also meant the co-creation with some teachers of this educational playground system called the learning landscape. 
It allows elementary-level students to learn core subjects through game play and activity and running around and screaming and being a kid. 
So this game that the kids are playing here -- in this case they were learning basic multiplication through a game called Match Me. 
And in Match Me, you take the class, divide it into two teams, one team on each side of the playground, and the teacher will take a piece of chalk and just write a number on each of the tires. 
And then she'll call out a math problem -- so let's say four times four -- and then one student from each team has to compete to figure out that four times four is 16 and find the tire with the 16 on it and sit on it. 
So the goal is to have all of your teammates sitting on the tires and then your team wins. 
And the impact of the learning landscape has been pretty surprising and amazing. 
Some of the classes and teachers have reported higher test scores, a greater comfort level with the material, especially with the boys, that in going outside and playing, they aren't afraid to take on a double-digit multiplication problem -- and also that the teachers are able to use these as assessment tools to better gauge how their students are understanding new material. 
So with design for education, I think the most important thing is to have a shared ownership of the solutions with the teachers, so that they have the incentive and the desire to use them. 
So this is Mr. Perry. He's the assistant superintendent. 
He came out for one of our teacher-training days and won like five rounds of Match Me in a row and was very proud of himself. 
(Laughter) So the second approach is redesigning education itself. 
This is the most complex. 
It's a systems-level look at how education is administered and what is being offered and to whom. 
So in many cases this is not so much about making change as it is creating the conditions under which change is possible and the incentive to want to make change, which is easier said than done in rural communities and in inside-the-box education systems in rural communities. 
So for us, this was a graphic public campaign called Connect Bertie. 
There are thousands of these blue dots all over the county. 
And this was for a fund that the school district had to put a desktop computer and a broadband Internet connection in every home with a child in the public school system. 
Right now I should say, there are only 10 percent of the houses that actually have an in-home Internet connection. 
And the only places to get WiFi are in the school buildings, or at the Bojangles Fried Chicken joint, which I find myself squatting outside of a lot. 
Aside from, you know, getting people excited and wondering what the heck these blue dots were all over the place, it asked the school system to envision how it might become a catalyst for a more connected community. 
It asked them to reach outside of the school walls and to think about how they could play a role in the community's development. 
So the first batch of computers are being installed later this summer, and we're helping Dr. Zullinger develop some strategies around how we might connect the classroom and the home to extend learning beyond the school day. 
And then the third approach, which is what I'm most excited about, which is where we are now, is: design as education. 
So "design as education" means that we could actually teach design within public schools, and not design-based learning -- not like "let's learn physics by building a rocket," but actually learning design-thinking coupled with real construction and fabrication skills put towards a local community purpose. 
It also means that designers are no longer consultants, but we're teachers, and we are charged with growing creative capital within the next generation. 
And what design offers as an educational framework is an antidote to all of the boring, rigid, verbal instruction that so many of these school districts are plagued by. 
It's hands-on, it's in-your-face, it requires an active engagement, and it allows kids to apply all the core subject learning in real ways. 
So we started thinking about the legacy of shop class and how shop class -- wood and metal shop class in particular -- historically, has been something intended for kids who aren't going to go to college. 
It's a vocational training path. 
It's working-class; it's blue-collar. 
The projects are things like, let's make a birdhouse for your mom for Christmas. 
And in recent decades, a lot of the funding for shop class has gone away entirely. 
So we thought, what if you could bring back shop class, but this time orient the projects around things that the community needed, and to infuse shop class with a more critical and creative-design-thinking studio process. 
So we took this kind of nebulous idea and have worked really closely with Dr. Zullinger for the past year on writing this as a one-year curriculum offered at the high school level to the junior class. 
And so this starts in four weeks, at the end of the summer, and my partner and I, Matthew and I, just went through the arduous and totally convoluted process of getting certified as high school teachers to actually run it. 
And this is what it looks like. 
So over the course of two semesters, the Fall and the Spring, the students spend three hours a day every single day in our 4,500 square foot studio/shop space. 
And during that time, they're doing everything from going out and doing ethnographic research and doing the need-finding, coming back into the studio, doing the brainstorming and design visualization to come up with concepts that might work, and then moving into the shop and actually testing them, building them, prototyping them, figuring out if they are going to work and refining that. 
And then over the summer, they're offered a summer job. 
They're paid as employees of Project H to be the construction crew with us to build these projects in the community. 
So the first project, which will be built next summer, is an open-air farmers' market downtown, followed by bus shelters for the school bus system in the second year and home improvements for the elderly in the third year. 
So these are real visible projects that hopefully the students can point to and say, "I built that, and I'm proud of it." 
So I want you to meet three of our students. 
This is Ryan. 
She is 15 years old. 
She loves agriculture and wants to be a high school teacher. 
She wants to go to college, but she wants to come back to Bertie County, because that's where her family is from, where she calls home, and she feels very strongly about giving back to this place that she's been fairly fortunate in. 
So what Studio H might offer her is a way to develop skills so that she might give back in the most meaningful way. 
This is Eric. He plays for the football team. 
He is really into dirtbike racing, and he wants to be an architect. 
So for him, Studio H offers him a way to develop the skills he will need as an architect, everything from drafting to wood and metal construction to how to do research for a client. 
And then this is Anthony. 
He is 16 years old, loves hunting and fishing and being outside and doing anything with his hands, and so for him, Studio H means that he can stay interested in his education through that hands-on engagement. 
He's interested in forestry, but he isn't sure, so if he ends up not going to college, he will have developed some industry-relevant skills. 
What design and building really offers to public education is a different kind of classroom. 
So this building downtown, which may very well become the site of our future farmers' market, is now the classroom. 
And going out into the community and interviewing your neighbors about what kind of food they buy and from where and why -- that's a homework assignment. 
And the ribbon-cutting ceremony at the end of the summer when they have built the farmers' market and it's open to the public -- that's the final exam. 
And for the community, what design and building offers is real, visible, built progress. 
It's one project per year, and it makes the youth the biggest asset and the biggest untapped resource in imagining a new future. 
So we recognize that Studio H, especially in its first year, is a small story -- 13 students, it's two teachers, it's one project in one place. 
But we feel like this could work in other places. 
And I really, strongly believe in the power of the small story, because it is so difficult to do humanitarian work at a global scale. 
Because, when you zoom out that far, you lose the ability to view people as humans. 
Ultimately, design itself is a process of constant education for the people that we work with and for and for us as designers. 
And let's face it, designers, we need to reinvent ourselves. 
We need to re-educate ourselves around the things that matter, we need to work outside of our comfort zones more, and we need to be better citizens in our own backyard. 
So while this is a very small story, we hope that it represents a step in the right direction for the future of rural communities and for the future of public education and hopefully also for the future of design. 
Thank you. 
(Applause) 

Today I want to talk to you about ethnic conflict and civil war. 
These are not normally the most cheerful of topics, nor do they generally generate the kind of good news that this conference is about. 
Yet, not only is there at least some good news to be told about fewer such conflicts now than two decades ago, but what is perhaps more important is that we also have come to a much better understanding of what can be done to further reduce the number of ethnic conflicts and civil wars and the suffering that they inflict. 
Three things stand out: leadership, diplomacy and institutional design. 
What I will focus on in my talk is why they matter, how they matter, and what we can all do to make sure that they continue to matter in the right ways, that is, how all of us can contribute to developing and honing the skills of local and global leaders to make peace and to make it last. 
But let's start at the beginning. 
Civil wars have made news headlines for many decades now, and ethnic conflicts in particular have been a near constant presence as a major international security threat. 
For nearly two decades now, the news has been bad and the images have been haunting. 
In Georgia, after years of stalemate, we saw a full-scale resurgence of violence in August, 2008. 
This quickly escalated into a five-day war between Russia and Georgia, leaving Georgia ever more divided. 
In Kenya, contested presidential elections in 2007 -- we just heard about them -- quickly led to high levels of inter-ethnic violence and the killing and displacement of thousands of people. 
In Sri Lanka, a decades-long civil war between the Tamil minority and the Sinhala majority led to a bloody climax in 2009, after perhaps as many as 100,000 people had been killed since 1983. 
In Kyrgyzstan, just over the last few weeks, unprecedented levels of violence occurred between ethnic Kyrgyz and ethnic Uzbeks. 
Hundreds have been killed, and more than 100,000 displaced, including many ethnic Uzbeks who fled to neighboring Uzbekistan. 
In the Middle East, conflict between Israelis and Palestinians continues unabated, and it becomes ever more difficult to see how, just how a possible, sustainable solution can be achieved. 
Darfur may have slipped from the news headlines, but the killing and displacement there continues as well, and the sheer human misery that it creates is very hard to fathom. 
And in Iraq, finally, violence is on the rise again, and the country has yet to form a government four months after its last parliamentary elections. 
But hang on, this talk is to be about the good news. 
So are these now the images of the past? 
Well, notwithstanding the gloomy pictures from the Middle East, Darfur, Iraq, elsewhere, there is a longer-term trend that does represent some good news. 
Over the past two decades, since the end of the Cold War, there has been an overall decline in the number of civil wars. 
Since the high in the early 1990s, with about 50 such civil wars ongoing, we now have 30 percent fewer such conflicts today. 
The number of people killed in civil wars also is much lower today than it was a decade ago or two. 
But this trend is less unambiguous. 
The highest level of deaths on the battlefield was recorded between 1998 and 2001, with about 80,000 soldiers, policemen and rebels killed every year. 
The lowest number of combatant casualties occurred in 2003, with just 20,000 killed. 
Despite the up and down since then, the overall trend -- and this is the important bit -- clearly points downward for the past two decades. 
The news about civilian casualties is also less bad than it used to be. 
From over 12,000 civilians deliberately killed in civil wars in 1997 and 1998, a decade later, this figure stands at 4,000. 
This is a decrease by two-thirds. 
This decline would be even more obvious if we factored in the genocide in Rwanda in 1994. 
But then 800,000 civilians were slaughtered in a matter of just a few months. 
This certainly is an accomplishment that must never be surpassed. 
What is also important is to note that these figures only tell part of the story. 
They exclude people that died as a consequence of civil war, from hunger or disease, for example. 
And they also do not properly account for civilian suffering more generally. 
Torture, rape and ethnic cleansing have become highly effective, if often non-lethal, weapons in civil war. 
To put it differently, for the civilians that suffer the consequences of ethnic conflict and civil war, there is no good war and there is no bad peace. 
Thus, even though every civilian killed, maimed, raped, or tortured is one too many, the fact that the number of civilian casualties is clearly lower today than it was a decade ago, is good news. 
So, we have fewer conflicts today in which fewer people get killed. 
And the big question, of course, is why? 
In some cases, there is a military victory of one side. 
This is a solution of sorts, but rarely is it one that comes without human costs or humanitarian consequences. 
The defeat of the Tamil Tigers in Sri Lanka is perhaps the most recent example of this, but we have seen similar so-called military solutions in the Balkans, in the South Caucasus and across most of Africa. 
At times, they are complimented by negotiated settlements, or at least cease-fire agreements, and peacekeepers are deployed. 
But hardly ever do they represent a resounding success -- Bosnia and Herzegovina perhaps more so than Georgia. 
But for many parts of Africa, a colleague of mine once put it this way, "The cease-fire on Tuesday night was reached just in time for the genocide to start on Wednesday morning." 
But let's look at the good news again. 
If there's no solution on the battlefield, three factors can account for the prevention of ethnic conflict and civil war, or for sustainable peace afterwards: leadership, diplomacy and institutional design. 
Take the example of Northern Ireland. 
Despite centuries of animosity, decades of violence and thousands of people killed, 1998 saw the conclusion of an historic agreement. 
Its initial version was skillfully mediated by Senator George Mitchell. 
Crucially, for the long-term success of the peace process in Northern Ireland, he imposed very clear conditions for the participation and negotiations. 
Central among them, a commitment to exclusively peaceful means. 
Subsequent revisions of the agreement were facilitated by the British and Irish governments, who never wavered in their determination to bring peace and stability to Northern Ireland. 
The core institutions that were put in place in 1998 and their modifications in 2006 and 2008 were highly innovative and allowed all conflict parties to see their core concerns and demands addressed. 
The agreement combines a power-sharing arrangement in Northern Ireland with cross-border institutions that link Belfast and Dublin and thus recognizes the so-called Irish dimension of the conflict. 
And significantly, there's also a clear focus on both the rights of individuals and the rights of communities. 
The provisions in the agreement may be complex, but so is the underlying conflict. 
Perhaps most importantly, local leaders repeatedly rose to the challenge of compromise, not always fast and not always enthusiastically, but rise in the end they did. 
Who ever could have imagined Ian Paisley and Martin McGuinness jointly governing Northern Ireland as First and Deputy First Minister? 
But then, is Northern Ireland a unique example, or does this kind of explanation only hold more generally in democratic and developed countries? 
By no means. 
The ending of Liberia's long-lasting civil war in 2003 illustrates the importance of leadership, diplomacy and institutional design as much as the successful prevention of a full-scale civil war in Macedonia in 2001, or the successful ending of the conflict in Aceh in Indonesia in 2005. 
In all three cases, local leaders were willing and able to make peace, the international community stood ready to help them negotiate and implement an agreement, and the institutions have lived up to the promise that they held on the day they were agreed. 
Focusing on leadership, diplomacy and institutional design also helps explain failures to achieve peace, or to make it last. 
The hopes that were vested in the Oslo Accords did not lead to an end of the Israeli/Palestinian conflict. 
Not all the issues that needed to be resolved were actually covered in the agreements. 
Rather, local leaders committed to revisiting them later on. 
Yet instead of grasping this opportunity, local and international leaders soon disengaged and became distracted by the second Intifada, the events of 9/11 and the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq. 
The comprehensive peace agreement for Sudan signed in 2005 turned out to be less comprehensive than envisaged, and its provisions may yet bear the seeds of a full-scale return to war between north and south. 
Changes and shortcomings in leadership, more off than on international diplomacy and institutional failures account for this in almost equal measure. 
Unresolved boundary issues, squabbles over oil revenues, the ongoing conflict in Darfur, escalating tribal violence in the south and generally weak state capacity across all of Sudan complete a very depressing picture of the state of affairs in Africa's largest country. 
A final example: Kosovo. 
The failure to achieve a negotiated solution for Kosovo and the violence, tension and de facto partition that resulted from it have their reasons in many, many different factors. 
Central among them are three. 
First, the intransigence of local leaders to settle for nothing less than their maximum demands. 
Second, an international diplomatic effort that was hampered from the beginning by Western support for Kosovo's independence. 
And third, a lack of imagination when it came to designing institutions that could have addressed the concerns of Serbs and Albanians alike. 
By the same token -- and here we have some good news again -- the very fact that there is a high-level, well-resourced international presence in Kosovo and the Balkans region more generally and the fact that local leaders on both sides have showed relative restraint, explains why things have not been worse over the past two years since 2008. 
So even in situations where outcomes are less than optimal, local leaders and international leaders have a choice, and they can make a difference for the better. 
A cold war is not as good as a cold peace, but a cold peace is still better than a hot war. 
Good news is also about learning the right lesson. 
So what then distinguishes the Israeli/Palestinian conflict from that in Northern Ireland, or the civil war in Sudan from that in Liberia? 
Both successes and failures teach us several critically important things that we need to bear in mind if we want the good news to continue. 
First, leadership. 
In the same way in which ethnic conflict and civil war are not natural but man-made disasters, their prevention and settlement does not happen automatically either. 
Leadership needs to be capable, determined and visionary in its commitment to peace. 
Leaders need to connect to each other and to their followers, and they need to bring them along on what is an often arduous journey into a peaceful future. 
Second, diplomacy. 
Diplomacy needs to be well resourced, sustained, and apply the right mix of incentives and pressures on leaders and followers. 
It needs to help them reach an equitable compromise, and it needs to ensure that a broad coalition of local, regional and international supporters help them implement their agreement. 
Third, institutional design. 
Institutional design requires a keen focus on issues, innovative thinking and flexible and well-funded implementation. 
Conflict parties need to move away from maximum demands and towards a compromise that recognizes each other's needs. 
And they need to think about the substance of their agreement much more than about the labels they want to attach to them. 
Conflict parties also need to be prepared to return to the negotiation table if the agreement implementation stalls. 
For me personally, the most critical lesson of all is this: Local commitment to peace is all-important, but it is often not enough to prevent or end violence. 
Yet, no amount of diplomacy or institutional design can make up for local failures and the consequences that they have. 
Therefore, we must invest in developing leaders, leaders that have the skills, vision and determination to make peace. 
Leaders, in other words, that people will trust and that they will want to follow even if that means making hard choices. 
A final thought: Ending civil wars is a process that is fraught with dangers, frustrations and setbacks. 
It often takes a generation to accomplish, but it also requires us, today's generation, to take responsibility and to learn the right lessons about leadership, diplomacy and institutional design, so that the child soldiers of today can become the children of tomorrow. 
Thank you. 
(Applause) 

I'm here today to show my photographs of the Lakota. 
Many of you may have heard of the Lakota, or at least the larger group of tribes, called the Sioux. 
The Lakota are one of many tribes that were moved off their land to prisoner-of-war camps, now called reservations. 
The Pine Ridge Reservation, the subject of today's slide show, is located about 75 miles southeast of the Black Hills in South Dakota. 
It is sometimes referred to as Prisoner of War Camp Number 334, and it is where the Lakota now live. 
Now, if any of you have ever heard of AIM, the American Indian Movement, or of Russell Means, or Leonard Peltier, or of the standoff at Oglala, then you know Pine Ridge is ground zero for Native issues in the US. 
So I've been asked to talk a little bit today about my relationship with the Lakota, and that's a very difficult one for me, because, if you haven't noticed from my skin color, I'm white, and that is a huge barrier on a Native reservation. 
You'll see a lot of people in my photographs today. 
I've become very close with them, and they've welcomed me like family. 
They've called me "brother" and "uncle," and invited me again and again over five years. 
But on Pine Ridge, I will always be what is called "wasichu." 
"Wasichu" is a Lakota word that means "non-Indian," but another version of this word means "the one who takes the best meat for himself." 
And that's what I want to focus on -- the one who takes the best part of the meat. 
It means "greedy." 
So take a look around this auditorium today. 
We are at a private school in the American West, sitting in red velvet chairs with money in our pockets. 
And if we look at our lives, we have indeed taken the best part of the meat. 
So let's look today at a set of photographs of a people who lost so that we could gain, and know that when you see these people's faces, that these are not just images of the Lakota; they stand for all indigenous people. 